



Produced by Shaun Pinder and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






[Illustration: _Photo by F. Babbage._

CHAMPION SHIRE STALLION, CHAMPION’S GOALKEEPER (30296).]




                            THE SHIRE HORSE
                           IN PEACE AND WAR

                                  BY
                            J. ALBERT FROST

                                LONDON
                        VINTON & COMPANY, LTD.
               8, BREAM’S BUILDINGS, CHANCERY LANE, E.C.
                                 1915




PREFACE


During the past year I have seen enquiries for a book on the management
of Shire Horses; therefore I have made an attempt to supply the want.
That the result leaves much--very much--to be desired I am well aware,
but at least the little work is free from fine phrases and technical
terms. Farmers prefer practical advice to literary merit in any book,
or paper, that they read, and this is written by one of their own class.

For six months England has been engaged in war, the most awful yet
waged for the reason that half the world is involved in it. It
naturally follows that little is read but war news. Consequently these
pages will be regarded as dull and uninteresting by those who have
become accustomed to thrilling stories from battlefields, seas, or
skies.

By those who take an interest in the world’s heaviest breed of horses,
as well as war news, this book may be tolerated, seeing that it deals
with the old “War Horse” of Britain, many true descendants being
actively engaged in moving “tons and guns” at the present time. I make
no claim to having written anything new, but as a kind of pocket record
of what Shire breeders, and exhibitors, have hitherto accomplished with
their animals the facts herein contained may be useful, and I hope that
all readers, as well as Shire breeders, will forgive any inaccuracies
in my figures and all the imperfections in this my first attempt at
book-writing.

In 1899 I won a small prize, offered by an agricultural paper for a
short article entitled “Rent-Paying Horses,” which I tried to point
out were Shire Horses. Since then I have contributed a little to the
live stock papers on the same subject, including an article for the
_Farmer and Stockbreeder Year Book_ of 1906, which is reprinted by the
editor’s permission. It was over the initials “S. H. L.,” which mean
“Shire Horse Lover.” I have been that from my school days, but never a
greater one than now.

                                                       J. ALBERT FROST.

    THE HOMESTEAD,
        BLETCHLEY, BUCKS.
            _January, 1915._

For figures and quotations I am indebted to the Stud Books and
Catalogues of the Shire Horse Society; the Journals of the Royal
Agricultural Society of England; to articles on Shire Horses, in the
_Live Stock Journal Almanac_, by the late Mr. G. M. Sexton (who died in
1894); and his successor, Mr. A. C. Beck; also to the late Sir Walter
Gilbey’s book on _The Great Horse_, published in 1899.

                                                               J. A. F.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                                              PAGE

    AUTHOR’S PREFACE                                        v

    I. A POPULAR BREED                                      1

    II. FOUNDING A STUD                                     8

    III. THE SELECTION OF SIRES                            12

    IV. BREEDING FROM FILLIES                              17

    V. TEAM WORK                                           23

    VI. REARING AND FEEDING                                30

    VII. CARE OF THE FEET                                  42

    VIII. HOW TO SHOW A SHIRE                              48

    IX. ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF THE SHIRE                   51

    X. FACTS AND FIGURES                                   61

    XI. HIGH PRICES                                        69

    XII. A FEW RECORDS                                     76

    XIII. JUDGES AT THE LONDON SHIRE SHOWS, 1890-1915      87

    XIV. THE EXPORT TRADE                                  92

    XV. PROMINENT PRESENT-DAY STUDS                       103

    XVI. THE FUTURE OUTLOOK                               121

    INDEX                                                 127




ILLUSTRATIONS


    STALLION: CHAMPION’S GOALKEEPER      _Facing Title Page_

    MARE: PAILTON SORAIS                 _Facing Page 1_




[Illustration: _Photo by F. Babbage._

CHAMPION SHIRE MARE, PAILTON SORAIS (45919).]




THE SHIRE HORSE IN PEACE AND WAR




CHAPTER I

A POPULAR BREED


There is no breed of horses which has attracted so much attention
during the past thirty years as the Old English War Horse. Originally
bred and preserved for fighting purposes, his size was increased by
importations of stallions and mares from Flanders--famous now and
henceforth as the battleground of the greatest war ever waged. In the
days when heavy armour was worn the cavalry horse could hardly be too
stout, and at that time ploughing was performed by oxen; but there
came a day when the English knights discarded their coats of mail and
thenceforward sought for light-legged mounts. This gave the horses bred
in “the Shires” a chance to distinguish themselves as draught horses,
for which their width of chest, short legs, and strong back were well
adapted: so the War Horse of the olden days became the Old English Cart
Horse.

Farmers--particularly Robert Bakewell--discovered that they could do
double, or treble, the quantity of ploughing with a pair of these
heavy horses that they could with an ox team; therefore draught horses
superseded bullocks for agricultural and haulage purposes, which meant
that they were bred for weight and substance, the biggest and heaviest
being regarded as the best.

Pedigrees of these massive animals were kept by a few progressive
breeders from the year 1800, at least; therefore it was not difficult
to compile a stud book for this Old English breed when a society, to
protect its interests, and promote its breeding, was formed in 1878
by a body of admirers, among whom the late Sir Walter Gilbey was
conspicuous. Included were also the Earl of Ellesmere, Earl Spencer,
Lord Wantage, Lord Egerton of Tatton, the Hon. Edward Coke, Mr.
Chandos Pole-Gell, Mr. Anthony Hamond, and Messrs. George and Frederic
Street, while H.R.H. the Prince of Wales (King Edward VII) was a keen
supporter of the Shire Horse Society from its inception.

All of those named have passed away; but not before they had seen their
efforts bear rich fruit in the rapid establishment of the industry of
Shire Horse breeding at home, and the world-wide fame achieved by the
breed abroad, but particularly in the United States of America, to
which country the majority of those exported have been sent.

Great changes have occurred since the Hon. E. Coke’s dispersion sale
at Longford Hall, Derby, in October, 1889, this being the first of
which the writer possesses a catalogue. It was caused by his death,
and his stud manager went from thence to take charge of the Royal Stud
of Shires at Sandringham for King Edward, who proved to be a very
successful breeder. Two champion mares, Gloaming and Solace, were bred,
and more than one successful sale held at Sandringham in the ’nineties
of last century, a decade during which it became the fashion for
landowners and wealthy men to own a stud of Shires so that they almost
tumbled over each other to secure the most notable specimens for their
studs. (The last sale of King Edward’s Shires was held at Wolferton in
1907.) The result was a reign of high prices which led many farmers
to believe that Shire Horse breeding was beyond the reach of their
pockets. Stud sales to the number of ten or twelve were held each year
from 1890 to 1902, when the total was fourteen and the number of Shires
sold 583, after which they began to dwindle till the past year of 1914,
during which there was not a single home sale.

To an outsider this might be taken to prove that the love and
enthusiasm for the Old English breed had fizzled out, that the Shire
had been “weighed in the balances and found wanting.” Nothing could be
further from the truth. The last home sale held was the most successful
that ever took place. Thirty-two animals, including several yearlings,
averaged £454 each at Lord Rothschild’s sale on February 14th, 1913,
one two-year-old colt, Champion’s Goalkeeper, making the record price
for a Shire of 4,100 guineas. After this one may well wonder why such
a good method of selling has been abandoned. The chief reason is that
the industry is no longer confined to those who live in mansions, or
think--financially--in thousands. It has become part of the routine of
hundreds of English tenant farmers to rear Shire horses, and as they
have only a few animals to offer at one time the Repository Sale has
superseded the Home gathering, helpful though these fraternal meetings
have always proved to the breed’s interests.

As before stated, most of those who held sales have gone the way of
all flesh, but besides those already named may be mentioned Sir P. A.
Muntz, Lord Llangattock, Mr. John Parnell, Mr. Fred Crisp, Mr. Philo L.
Mills, Mr. James Eadie, Mr. Arthur Ransom, and Mr. J. A. Barrs. All of
these were buyers, breeders, and exhibitors of the best in their day,
together with others too numerous to mention.

The loss of these supporters has, however, been made good by new ones,
more numerous, if less influential; therefore the Shire breeding
industry has never been on a broader base than it is to-day.

These lines are being written when horses are in greater demand for
war purposes than they have ever been before in the world’s history,
and although the Shire has for generations been transformed into a
peace, rather than a war, horse he has not escaped the notice of the
army buyer. We have it on the best authority--that of the official
auctioneer to the Shire Horse Society--that “many a pure-bred Shire
mare and gelding are now pulling heavy guns and transport waggons in
France and Belgium, besides which nearly all the best gunners are by
Shire stallions.”

It is scarcely necessary to point out that the best Shires of this
period weigh over one ton, and to pull weight you must have weighty
animals; therefore these massive modern cart horses are just as useful
in hauling heavy guns, the most effective weapons in modern warfare, as
their ancestors were in carrying the bold British knights cased from
head to foot in steel armour.

But war, though it lasts long--too long--comes to an end, and when this
one does horses will be wanted in thousands to make up for those lost
by the eight or nine nations now fighting for their existence.

It is perfectly clear that the great studs of Shires as they existed
a few years ago are being dispersed. Very few breeders of the present
time could have sixty high class animals paraded, as the late Lord
Ellesmere did for the benefit of visitors to the Worsley show in
August, 1889; but scores of farmers could muster a team or two of good
Shire mares; therefore it is obvious that, whatever the future of the
Shire may be, English farmers will do much towards shaping it.




CHAPTER II

FOUNDING A STUD


As this little book is intended for farmers more than for stud owners,
a better heading for this chapter would have been “Selecting the Dams,”
for without sound, useful mares no breeder can hope to achieve success
with the horses he breeds.

It has been possible to grade up one’s old stock of mares by using
registered stallions until they were eligible for the Stud Book; but
this is too tedious a course to recommend in these days; moreover, the
demand for draught mares is now so keen that the difference in the
price of a pedigree and a common non-pedigree mare is scarcely worth
considering. Therefore the beginner who wishes to breed pedigree Shires
should dispose of his unregistered mares to re-invest his money in
females which are worth mating with a really good sire, so that the
full benefits of the industry may be more quickly forthcoming.

Of course there is a wide range of choice in Shire mares; consequently
there is plenty of scope for the skill and judgment of the purchaser.
Those which are fashionably bred, perfectly sound and likely to make
prize winners usually realize high prices, while prizes already won add
considerably to the market value of any Shire, male or female.

One must decide according to his means whether he will launch out and
buy one or two of the most famous mares to be obtained, or whether he
will proceed cautiously, and with as little outlay as possible, by
picking up useful specimens as they come under his notice; but it may
be pointed out that the man who attends sales and gives sensational
prices advertises himself, thus getting a more favourable start than
the plodder.

The initial, or foundation, stock, whatever its cost, should be
free from hereditary unsoundness, otherwise disappointment will be
encountered in the offspring.

It is much more easy to find sound Shires now than it was in the early
years of the Shire Horse Society, when the rejections for unsoundness
were very numerous, as the following extract from a show report of the
past will prove:--“The judges selected ten horses to be sent out for
veterinary inspection in the hope, vain though it proved to be, that at
least half of them would be again found in the ring with a certificate
of soundness, so that no difficulty would be experienced in securing
sufficient sound animals to which they could award the three prizes and
the reserve number. Not so, however; and the stewards were compelled to
seek in the boxes for other horses to be sent out for examination in
order that the rosettes might be placed.”

Unsoundness on such a scale has long ceased to exist, largely through
the efforts of the Shire Horse Society in sticking to their rule of
giving prizes and commendations to sound animals only.

This does not imply that unsoundness cannot be found in the Shires of
to-day. Unfortunately it is still possible to buy a mare, or use a
stallion, with undesirable and readily inherited complaints; therefore
it is very necessary for farmers--who wish to make their Shires do a
share towards paying the rent--to discriminate between a sound and an
unsound horse, or mare, or to decide for himself whether to take or
refuse a blemished animal. There are many of the latter which often
prove a good investment, and as a veterinary surgeon cannot always
be found at a moment’s notice it is desirable for breeders to make
themselves acquainted with the conformation of a sound and perfectly
moulded animal, so as to be able to rely on one’s own judgment when
buying or selling.

Shire Horse history has proved that the purchase of one sound mare with
good back breeding has led to fame and fortune, a fact which should not
be forgotten when home breeding is being embarked upon or extended.




CHAPTER III

THE SELECTION OF SIRES


The question of mating is one of great importance in the breeding of
any class of live stock, hence the necessity of rejecting a commonplace
sire whether he is to be purchased or only patronized for nominations.

The cheap sire is common enough even in these days, and the fact that
his services cost little gives him a popularity altogether unmerited
and very injurious to the best interests of Shire breeding. Quite
recently I saw twenty quarters of wheat delivered by a small farmer
from whom it was purchased. In one of the carts I was surprised to find
a five-year-old stallion, light in bone, pale chestnut in colour, and
quite small--just the sort to haul guns or baggage to “the front” at
the present time, but obviously unfit to serve a mare if a weighty cart
horse was expected as the result. Yet the owner claimed to have got
a lot of mares to this horse for the past two seasons. This sort of
thing going on all over the country, naturally lowers the standard. A
farmer saves a yearling colt because he “likes the look of it.” At two
years old he uses him on his own mares and invites his neighbours to
send theirs, the terms being something like £1 each mare, or, perhaps,
“No colt, no pay,” and £1 10_s._ if the mare proves to be in foal.

Such a system of breeding may help to increase the horse population,
and those bred in this haphazard fashion may find a ready market while
a great war is in progress, but it is not Shire breeding in the true
sense; therefore a farmer who possesses even a useful mare should
not object to paying a reasonable service fee, or, if he uses his
neighbour’s horse, he should at least ascertain if he is sound and of
good parentage.

The work of the Shire Horse Society is to “improve the Old English
Breed of Cart Horses.” It has been carried on for thirty-six years
very successfully, notwithstanding the injurious effect wrought by
such stallions as that above mentioned, and it rests with the present
members of the Shire Horse Society to carry on the work which, as
aforesaid, was so well begun and maintained by such men as the late
Sir Walter Gilbey, to whom all lovers of Shire Horses are indebted for
his book on “The Great Horse,” which gives the history of the breed
from the time of the Roman Invasion till the year 1889 (when the first
edition of the book appeared), at which date Shire Horse breeding had
become a great national industry, that year having been the best on
record for the number of export certificates granted. A second edition
brings the work up to 1899.

When wealthy stud owners place the best of stallions within the reach
of tenant farmers it is a mistake to miss the opportunity, but those
less fortunately placed are now able, if they desire to do so, to
profit by the Development Grant of the State, which enables them to get
mares to sound--if not front rank--stallions at low fees or by assisted
nominations. That a horse breeder should be content to mate his mares
with a mongrel when it is easily possible to aim higher seems difficult
to understand in these days when pedigree means so much in market
value.

For the production of geldings, fashionable blood is not essential,
but it sometimes happens that a foal of outstanding merit is bred
by quite a small farmer, and if such an one is by a well-known sire
of prize-winning stock, a real good price may be obtained, if the
dam is only registered, so there is much to be said in favour of
using the highest type of Shire stallion, even by owners of one or
two mares. Fortunately farmers are able to secure special terms for
their mares from most stud owners, and there are many local societies
which hire a real good horse and charge a smaller sum to their own
members than to outsiders. Among such societies may be mentioned
Peterborough, Welshpool, and Winslow, in all of which districts many
high-class Shires have been bred. Then there are generous landlords
who hire a real good horse for the benefit of their tenants--although
not Shire breeders themselves--so that it is quite possible for the
majority of tenant farmers to obtain nominations to one of the best
of Shire stallions if he is bent on improvement and believes in being
enterprising enough to obtain it. The indifference which leads horse
breeders to use a mongrel which comes into the yard, rather than
send further afield to a better animal is inexcusable in a member of
the Shire Horse Society, neither is such an one likely to improve his
financial position by means of his heavy horses, which large numbers of
farmers have done during the depressed times. An extra five pounds for
a service fee may be, and often is, fifty when the foal is sold.




CHAPTER IV

BREEDING FROM FILLIES


For many years it has been a debatable point whether two-year-old
fillies should be bred from or not. The pros and cons have been
discussed, and in the end Shire breeders have used their own discretion
on the point. Superior animals have, however, been bred from youthful
parents on both sides, a notable instance being the late Lord Wantage’s
Lady Victoria; her sire was Prince William, the London and Royal
Champion, and her dam Glow, by the London Champion Spark. She was the
first foal of a two-year-old colt, with a two-year-old filly for her
dam, yet she made a great prize-winning mare, having won first and cup
in London in 1889 and championship of the Oxfordshire Show in 1890.

It may also be mentioned that Buscot Harold, the London Champion
stallion of 1898, was begotten when his sire, Markeaton Royal Harold,
was but a two-year-old colt, although his dam, Aurea, was older. At two
years old he was preferred to his sire for the Elsenham Challenge Cup.

This proves that Shire breeders have been making good use of fillies
for many years, therefore the produce of a three-year-old filly
need not be rejected, neither should the nursing of a foal at that
age necessarily result in a stunted or plain mare. It is, however,
necessary to grow fillies along with the aid of supplementary food and
to “do” both them and their foals well while they are suckling.

There is no doubt that the Shires of the present day do get more food
and attention than they did in bygone days, when it was unnecessary
to strive after showyard size, because shows did not exist in such
numbers, so that the farmer who exhibited cart horses was rarely met
with, and young horse stock were not fed to encourage size and growth.
So long as they could be put into the team at three years old and mated
at four, that was considered early enough to work or to breed.

At the present time the horse population of Great Britain and Europe,
if not of the whole world, is being reduced by the greatest of all
wars, consequently it is desirable for Shire breeders to do their share
towards making good the shortage. If fillies are well kept from birth
they will attain size and may be mated at two years old to a young
horse, but not too early in the season. The end of May is early enough
for fillies, and a big heavy old horse should not be chosen under
any circumstances. If served at the right time they are more likely
to breed than fillies a year older, and it makes a lot of difference
whether a five-year-old mare has a couple of sons and daughters or even
one to her credit, or no offspring at all, when the profit and loss
account is being made up by a farmer.

It may be that a three-year-old cannot be got into a fat state for
show with a foal running by her side, but the prolonged rest at that
age does her no harm. She will come up all right at a later period,
and is more likely to make a regular breeder than if not mated till
three years old. A mare which breeds from the age of three till she
is fifteen is a great help in the way of production, even if she only
averages one foal in two years, which is, perhaps, as many as it is
safe to reckon on for rearing to maturity, although, of course, there
are plenty of mares which have produced a good foal for ten or eleven
years in succession. They will breed till they are twenty-five, to the
writer’s knowledge, but the average age at which Shire mares breed
their last foal must be put somewhere round fifteen.

There is no doubt that we have learned much in horse management since
shows have become so popular, although it may be that high feeding for
show purposes has been--and is--the cause of a lower percentage of
foals among high class show animals of both sexes.

To prepare fillies for mating at two years old may be compared to
feeding for early maturity in cattle and sheep, except that many of the
latter are only grown and fattened to be killed, whereas Shires are
meant to live a long and useful life. It is, therefore, necessary to
build up a frame with this idea in view. An outdoor life should be led,
while the food should be both good and sufficient, as well as being
suitable.

There is no time to be wasted, and if foals are allowed to get into low
condition while being weaned, or during their first winter, they are
less fit to make robust two-year-olds fit either to work or to breed,
or what is more profitable, to accomplish both of these tasks together
during part of the year.

If early maturity is aimed at with any class of stock, feeding and
management must be of the best, therefore farmers who half starve their
foals and allow their yearlings to be wintered on a bit of hay must not
expect their two-year-olds to be well grown and in the best possible
condition for parental duties.

The situation at the present time is such that every horse-breeder
should do his best to utilize to the full the horse stock which he
possesses, so that a sufficient number of horses may be obtained to
carry on the agriculture and trade of the country, both of which are
likely to require horses in large numbers in the immediate future.

Mares will be relatively more scarce than stallions for the reason
that the latter have not been “commandeered” for war purposes, but as
geldings have been taken in large numbers, there is, and will be, a
great demand for workers of all grades.

Under such circumstances Shire breeders may serve their own interests
by mating their fillies with a good young sire at two years old and
keeping them in good condition for producing a strong vigorous foal.
Very few of Robert Bakewell’s remarks are recorded, but this one is,
“The only way to be sure of good offspring is to have good cows as well
as good bulls,” and this applies with equal, if not greater, force in
the business of horse-breeding; the sire cannot effect the whole of the
improvement.




CHAPTER V

TEAM WORK


Since my very youthful days I have always been accustomed to putting
cart colts into the team at two years old, a system which cannot be too
strongly advocated at the present time, when every worker in the shape
of a horse is needed.

There are numbers of high-class Shires living a life of luxurious
idleness to-day, for the only reason that they were never trained to
work, yet they would be quite as well in health, and more likely to
breed, if they were helping to do ploughing or almost any kind of
farm work when not actually nursing a foal or being prepared for any
important show.

When a Shire mare can be sold as “a good worker,” a buyer feels that he
is getting something for his money, even if she fails to breed, so that
there is much to be said in favour of putting fillies into the team,
and nothing against, so far as I know, unless they are over-worked,
strained, or stunted.

A non-breeding mare which will not work is an impossible, or useless,
sort of animal on a farm, where mere ornaments are not required,
whereas if she is a worker in all gears she is “anybody’s mare”; on the
other hand, she is nobody’s if she refuses either to work or to breed.

Geldings for haulage purposes are always in demand, but big powerful
mares are equally useful for the same purpose, and it is much better to
sell a non-breeder for the lorry than to sell her for another breeder
to meet with disappointment. It is obvious that there will be a great
scarcity of weighty working horses when the countries now involved in
war settle down to peaceful trades and occupations, and there is no
country which stands to benefit more than Great Britain, which is the
best of all breeding grounds for draught horses.

To allow, what would otherwise be, a useful worker to eat the bread
of idleness because it was regarded as too well bred or valuable to
wear a collar is not a policy to pursue or to recommend, especially to
farmers, seeing that the arable land tenant can put a colt into the
team, between two steady horses at almost any time of the year, while
the occupiers of grass farms may easily start their young Shires as
workers by hitching them to a log of wood or some chain harrows, and
afterwards work them in a roll.

There is no doubt, whatever, that many stallions would leave a much
higher percentage of foals if they were “broken in” during their
two-year-old days, so that they would take naturally to work when they
grew older and could therefore be relied upon to work and thus keep
down superfluous fat. This would be far better than allowing them to
spend something like nine months of the year in a box or small paddock
with nothing to do but eat.

In past times more working stallions could be found, and they
were almost invariably good stock getters, but since showing has
become popular it is almost a general rule to keep well-bred, or
prize-winning, colts quite clear of the collar lest they should work
themselves down in condition and so fail to please possible buyers on
the look-out for show candidates.

A little more than twenty years ago there was an outcry against show
condition in Shires, and this is what a very eminent breeder of those
days said on the subject of fat--

    “It is a matter of no consequence to any one, save their
    owners, when second or third-class horses are laden with
    blubber; but it is a national calamity when the best
    animals--those that ought to be the proud sires and dams of
    an ever-improving race--are stuffed with treacle and drugged
    with poisons in order to compete successfully with their
    inferiors. Hence come fever in the feet, diseased livers, fatty
    degeneration of the heart, and a host of ailments that often
    shorten the lives of their victims and always injure their
    constitutions.”

This bears out my contention that Shires of both sexes would pay for a
course of training in actual collar work, no matter how blue-blooded as
regards ancestry or how promising for the show ring. The fact that a
colt by a London champion had been seen in the plough team, or between
a pair of shafts, would not detract from his value in the eyes of a
judge, or prevent him from becoming a weighty and muscular horse; in
fact, it would tend to the development of the arms and thighs which
one expects to find in a Shire stallion, and if from any cause a stud
or show career is closed, a useful one at honest work may still be
carried on.

Wealthy stud owners can afford to pay grooms to exercise their horses,
but farmers find--and are more than ever likely to find--that it is
necessary to make the best possible use of their men; therefore,
if their colts and fillies are put to work and rendered perfectly
tractable, they will grow up as stallions which may be worked instead
of being aimlessly exercised, while the mares can spend at least half
of their lives in helping to carry on the ordinary work of the farm.

It is certainly worth while to take pains to train a young Shire,
which is worth rearing at all, to lead from its foalhood days so that
it is always approachable if required for show or sale, and these
early lessons prepare it for the time when it is old enough to put its
shoulders into the collar, this being done with far less risk than it
is in the case of youngsters which have been turned away and neglected
till they are three years old. The breaking in of this class of colt
takes time and strength, while the task of getting a halter on is no
light one, and the whole business of lungeing, handling, and harnessing
requires more brute force and courage than the docile animal trained in
infancy calls for.

The secret of training any horse is to keep it from knowing its own
strength; therefore, if it is taught to lead before it is strong enough
to break away, and to be tied up before it can break the headcollar
by hanging back it is obvious that less force is required. The horse
which finds he can break his halter by hanging back is likely to become
a troublesome animal to stand tied up, while the one which throws its
rider two or three times does not forget that it is possible to get a
man off its back; therefore it is better and safer if they never gain
such knowledge of their own powers.

The Shire breeding farmer ought to be able to go into his field and put
a halter on any animal required, from a foal to an old horse, and he
can do this if they have been treated with kindness and handled from
their early days.

This is a matter to which many farmers should give more attention than
they do, seeing that an ill-trained show animal may lose a prize for no
other reason than that its show manners are faulty, whereas those of
the nearest rival are perfect.

The writer was taught this while showing at a County Show very early in
his career. The animal he was leading was--like himself--rather badly
educated, and this was noticed by one of the oldest and best judges of
that day, and this is what he whispered in his ear, “My lad, if you
would only spend your time training your horses instead of going to
cricket they would do you more credit and win more prizes.” This advice
I have never forgotten, and I pass it on for the benefit of those who
have yet to learn “the ropes.”




CHAPTER VI

REARING AND FEEDING


During the past few years we have heard much about early maturity with
all kinds of stock. Four-year-old bullocks are rarely seen in these
days, while wether sheep are being superseded by tegs. With Shire
Horses there has been a considerable amount of attention paid to size
in yearlings, two- and three-year-olds, which, as before stated, is
equivalent to early maturity in the case of cattle and sheep. For the
purpose of getting size an animal must be well fed from birth, and this
applies to foals. Of course, the date of birth counts for a good deal
when foals are shown with their dams, as it does to a less extent with
yearlings, but after that age it makes very little difference whether a
foal is born in February or in May.

From a farmer’s point of view I do not believe in getting Shire foals
too early. They have to be housed for a lengthened period, and the
dams fed on food which may be expensive. At the present time good oats
are worth 30_s._ per quarter, and hay, fit for horses, at least 90_s._
per ton, so that two or three months of winter feeding means a little
sum added to the cost of raising a foal.

The middle of April is early enough for the average foal to arrive,
and he can then make quite a good size by September if his dam is an
ordinarily good suckler and he contracts no ailments, such as chills
or scour, to check his progress. When colts are a month old they will
begin to pick up crushed oats and bran while the dam is feeding,
therefore it is no trouble to teach them to eat from a manger.

A word of caution is necessary to the inexperienced in the matter of
feeding the dam until the foal is a few days old and strong enough to
take all her milk. This is to feed the mare sparingly so as not to
flush her milk while the youngster is unable to take it fast enough. Of
course, the surplus can be milked away, as it should be if the bag is
tight, but this may be neglected and then scour is often set up, which
a very young foal often succumbs to. It is better that the mare should
have too little than too much milk while the youngster gets fairly on
his legs.

Cows always have most of their milk taken away, but young lambs as well
as foals often suffer through taking too much of the dam’s milk during
the first day or two of their existence.

If a foal is born during the grazing season the flow of milk can be
regulated by keeping the mare in a bare pasture, or shutting her up for
part of the day.

Supposing that the foal survives the ills incidental to its early life,
and gains in strength with the lengthening days, its first dry food
will be taken when the mare is fed, which she should be, especially
if she is either a young or an old mare, while show candidates will
naturally need something more than grass. The object is to promote
steady growth and maintain good health, and it should not be forgotten
that oats are the best of all corn for horses; therefore no other kind
should be given to a foal, but on good grazing land a mare will usually
maintain herself and her foal in good condition for a good part of the
summer without manger food.

It is towards weaning time that a manger is needed, into which should
be put crushed (not whole) oats, together with an equal quantity of
bran and a bit of good chaff. At the outset the mare will eat most of
it, but the foal will benefit by getting richer milk and more of it,
which he can now take without any ill effects. In time he acquires the
habit of standing up to the manger and taking his share. It is very
necessary to see that all foals eat well before they are weaned.

The cost of feeding a foal during its first winter may be roughly
reckoned at ten shillings per week, which is made up as follows--

                             _s._ _d._

    80 lbs. of oats           6    0
    56    ”    hay            2    0
    28    ”    bran           1    6
    28    ”    oat straw      0    9
    28    ”    carrots        0    3

The bulk of the hay and all the oat straw should be fed in the form of
chaff with the oats, bran and carrots (well cleaned and pulped), then
a very good everyday diet can be formed by mixing the whole together,
and one which few horses will refuse. Of course the items are not
reckoned at the extreme prices prevailing in the winter of 1914-1915,
but they could often be bought for less, so that it is a fair average.

It will be seen that oats form the biggest part, for the reason
aforesaid, that they are better than other kinds of corn.

A little long hay should be given at night--more when there is snow on
the ground--the other mixture divided into two feeds per day, morning
and evening, unless showing is contemplated in the early Spring, when,
of course, an extra feed will be given at mid-day.

The fashion has changed during the past few years as regards hay for
horses. Meadow hay is regarded, and rightly so, as too soft, so hard
seeds are invariably chosen by grooms or owners who want value for
money.

It is quite easy to ascertain which a horse likes best by putting some
good hard mixture and equally well-gotten meadow hay side by side in
front of him. He will certainly eat that first which he likes best, and
it will be found to be the harder mixture. The quantities mentioned
are for foals which lie out or run on pasture.

The best place for wintering them is in a paddock or field, with a
roomy shed open to the south. A yard, walled or slabbed on three sides,
the south again being open to the field, with doors wide enough to
admit a cart, is a very useful addition to the shed, as it is then
possible to shut the youngsters in when necessary.

Both yard and shed should be kept littered, if straw is plentiful, but
if not the shed should contain a good bedding of peat-moss litter. No
overhead racks should be used, but one on the same level as the manger,
so that no seeds drop out of the rack into the colt’s eyes.

It will be found that foals reared in this way are healthy and ready
for their feed, and they will often prefer to lie full length in
the open than to rest in the shed. To see them lying quite flat and
fast asleep, looking as if dead, is a pretty sure sign that they are
thriving. They will often snore quite loudly, so that a novice may
consider that they are ill.

Rock salt should be within reach for them to lick, together with good
clean water. If a trough is used for the latter it should be cleaned
out at intervals, and if a pond or ditch is the drinking place, there
should be a stone mouth so as to avoid stalking in the mud. A healthy
horse is a hungry horse, therefore the feed should be cleaned up before
the next is put in. This must be noted in the case of foals just
weaned. Any left over should be taken away and given to older horses,
so that the little ones receive a sweet and palatable meal.

Condition and bloom may be obtained by adding a small quantity of
boiled barley or a handful of linseed meal to the food above mentioned,
while horses lying in should have a boiled linseed and bran mash about
once a week.

It should be remembered, as before stated, that horses are not like
cattle, sheep, or pigs, being fattened to be killed. They have a
comparatively long life in front of them, so that it is necessary to
build up a good constitution. Then they may change hands many times,
and if they pass from where cooked foods and condiments are largely
used to where plain food is given they are apt to refuse it and lose
flesh in consequence, thus leading the new owner to suppose that he
has got a bad bargain.

Reference has already been made to the pernicious system of stuffing
show-animals, and it is not often that farmers err in this direction.
They are usually satisfied with feeding their horses on sound and
wholesome home-grown food without purchasing costly extras to make
their horses into choice feeders.

It is always better for the breeder of any class of stock if the
animals he sells give satisfaction to the purchasers, and this is
particularly true of Shire horses. A doubtful breeder or one which is
not all that it should be may be fattened up and sold at more than its
market value, but the buyer would not be likely to go to the same man
if he wanted another horse, therefore it is better to gain a reputation
for honest dealing and to make every effort to keep it.

It might be here mentioned that it is not at all satisfactory to rear
a Shire foal by itself, even if it will stay in its paddock. It never
thrives as well as when with company, and often stands with its head
down looking very mopish and dull, therefore the rearing of Shires is
not a suitable undertaking for a small holder, although he may keep
a good brood-mare to do most of his work and sell her foal at weaning
time.

In the absence of a second foal a donkey is sometimes used as a
companion to a single one, but he is a somewhat unsatisfactory
playfellow, therefore the farmer with only one had far better sell it
straight from the teat, or if he has suitable accommodation he should
buy another to lie with it and rear the two together. Of course, two
will need more food than one, but no more journeys will be required to
carry it to the manger. Care should be taken, however, to buy one quite
as good, and if possible better, than the home-bred one.

If they are to make geldings the colour should match, but if for
breeding purposes the colour need not necessarily be the same. Except
for making a working gelding, however, chestnuts should be avoided. It
is not a desirable colour to propagate, so one can breed enough of that
shade without buying one. A remark which may be also made with regard
to unsound ones, viz. that most horse-breeders get enough of them
without buying.

During their second summer--that is as yearlings--Shires not wanted for
show purposes should be able to do themselves well at grass, supposing
the land is of average quality and not overstocked, but if the soil
is very poor it may be necessary to give a small feed once a day, of
which pulped mangolds may form a part if they are plentiful. This extra
feeding is better than stunting the growth, and the aim is to get a big
romping two-year-old colt, filly, or gelding as the case may be.

Colts not up to the desired standard should be operated on during their
yearling days, preferably in May or June, and, as before indicated,
merit should be conspicuous in those left for stud purposes, while the
back breeding on both sides counts for much in a stallion. That is why
Lockinge Forest King, Childwick Champion, and a few others which could
be named, proved to be such prepotent stock-getters.

After June or July colts should be separated from fillies unless the
colts have been castrated, and they must be put inside good fences,
this being something of a puzzle to a farmer with a few paddocks and
poor fences. Consequently, a second or third-rate young stallion often
causes a good deal of trouble, in fact, more than he leaves a return
for.

For the second winter the young Shires still need a bit of help. If
they are to make, or are likely to make, anything out of the common
they should be fed liberally, otherwise a feed of chaff and corn once a
day will do, with a bit of hay to munch at night, but it must be good
wholesome forage.

During their second spring, or when two years old, they should be put
to work as described in a former chapter, after which they are able at
least to earn their keep; the cost of rearing on the lines indicated up
to this age will be found to be considerable, so that a good saleable
animal is needed to make the business a profitable one; but I have kept
the rearing of good sound Shires in view, not crocks or mongrels.

The effect of the war on the cost of feeding horses has led the Board
of Agriculture and Fisheries to issue a leaflet telling horse owners
of substitutes for oats. When it was written beans were relatively
cheaper, so was maize, while rice-meal was recommended to form part of
the mixture, owing to its lower cost.

Those who have fed horses are aware that they do not like any food
which is of a dusty nature. It sticks in their nostrils, causing them
annoyance, if not discomfort, which a horse indicates by blowing its
nose frequently.

Any kind of light meal should therefore be fed either with damp chaff
or with pulped roots, well mixed with the feed in the manner described
elsewhere. If mangolds have to be purchased at £1 per ton, they help to
make the meals more palatable. The farmer who grows a variety of corn
and roots is usually able to prepare and blend his own foods so as to
make a diet on which horses will thrive although oats are scarce.

In Scotland boiled swedes or turnips are largely used for farm horses,
but coal and labour are now scarce as well as horse corn.




CHAPTER VII

CARE OF THE FEET


There is no part of a Shire to which more attention should be paid
than the feet, and it is safe to say that the foot of the present-day
cart-horse is infinitely better than were those of his ancestors of
forty, or even twenty, years ago. The shape as well as the size has
been improved till the donkey-shaped hoof is rarely met with, at least
in show animals of this breed.

It is always advisable to keep the feet of foals, yearlings, and
two-year-olds attended to whether they are required for show or not,
and if they have their feet quietly picked up and the edges rasped, the
heels being lowered a little when necessary, the hoof is prevented from
breaking, and a better and more durable hoof well repays the trouble,
moreover the task of fixing the first set of shoes--which used to be
quite a tough job for the smith when the colts were neglected till
they were three years old--is rendered quite easy.

Except for travelling on the road, or when required for show, there is
no advantage in keeping shoes on young Shires, therefore they should be
taken off when lying idle, or if worked only on soft ground shoes are
not actually necessary.

Where several are lying together, or even two, those with shoes on may
cause ugly wounds on their fellows, whereas a kick with the naked hoof
is not often serious. There is also a possibility that colts turned
away to grass with their shoes on will have the removing neglected, and
thus get corns, so that the shoeless hoof is always better for young
Shires so long as it is sound and normal. If not, of course, it should
be treated accordingly.

In a dry summer, when the ground is very hard, it may be advisable
to use tips so that the foot may be preserved, this being especially
necessary in the case of thin and brittle hoofs.

For growing and preserving good strong feet in Shire horses clay land
seems to answer best, seeing that those reared on heavy-land farms
almost invariably possess tough horn on which a shoe can be affixed to
last till it wears out.

For the purpose of improving weak feet in young Shires turning them out
in cool clay land may be recommended, taking care to assist the growth
by keeping the heels open so that the frog comes into contact with the
ground.

Weakness in the feet has been regarded, and rightly so, as a bad fault
in a Shire stallion, therefore good judges have always been particular
to put bottoms first when judging. Horses of all kinds have to travel,
which they cannot do satisfactorily for any length of time if their
feet are ill-formed or diseased, and it should be borne in mind that
a good or a bad foot can be inherited. “No foot, no horse,” is an old
and true belief. During the past few years farmers have certainly paid
more attention to the feet of their young stock because more of them
are shown, the remarks of judges and critics having taught them that
a good top cannot atone for poor bottoms, seeing that Shires are not
like stationary engines, made to do their work standing. They have to
spend a good part of their lives on hard roads or paved streets, where
contracted or tender feet quickly come to grief, therefore those who
want to produce saleable Shires should select parents with the approved
type of pedals, and see that those of the offspring do not go wrong
through neglect or mismanagement.

There is no doubt that a set of good feet often places an otherwise
moderate Shire above one which has other good points but lacks this
essential; therefore all breeders of Shires should devote time and
attention to the production of sound and saleable bottoms, remembering
the oft-quoted line, “The top may come, the bottom never.” In diseases
of the feet it is those in front which are the most certain to go
wrong, and it is these which judges and buyers notice more particularly.

If fever manifests itself it is generally in the fore feet; while
side-bone, ring-bone, and the like are incidental to the front coronets.

Clay land has been spoken of for rearing Shires, but there are various
kinds of soil in England, all of which can be utilized as a breeding
ground for the Old English type of cart-horses.

In Warwickshire Shires are bred on free-working red land, in Herts a
chalky soil prevails, yet champions abound there; while very light
sandy farms are capable of producing high-class Shires if the farmer
thereof sets his mind on getting them, and makes up for the poorness or
unsuitability of the soil by judicious feeding and careful management.

It may be here stated that an arable farm can be made to produce a
good deal more horse forage than one composed wholly of pasture-land,
therefore more horses can be kept on the former.

Heavy crops of clovers, mixtures, lucerne, etc., can be grown and mown
twice in the season, whereas grass can only be cut once. Oats and
oat straw are necessary, or at least desirable, for the rearing of
horses, so are carrots, golden tankard, mangold, etc; consequently an
arable-land farmer may certainly be a Shire horse breeder.

This is getting away from the subject of feet, however, and it may be
returned to by saying that stable management counts for a good deal in
the growth and maintenance of a sound and healthy hoof.

Good floors kept clean, dry litter, a diet in which roots appear,
moving shoes at regular intervals, fitting them to the feet, and not
rasping the hoof down to fit a too narrow shoe, may be mentioned as
aids in retaining good feet.

As stated, the improvement in this particular has been very noticeable
since the writer’s first Shire Horse Show (in 1890), but perfection
has not yet been reached, therefore it remains for the breeders of the
present and the future to strive after it.

There was a time when exhibitors of “Agricultural” horses stopped the
cracks and crevices in their horses’ feet with something in the nature
of putty, which is proved by reading a report of the Leeds Royal of
1861, where “the judges discovered the feet of one of the heavy horses
to be stopped with gutta-percha and pitch.”




CHAPTER VIII

HOW TO SHOW A SHIRE


A few remarks on the above subject will not come amiss, at least to
the uninitiated, for it is tolerably certain that, other things being
equal, the candidate for honours which makes the best show when it is
actually before the judges stands the first chance of securing the
honours.

It must not be expected that a colt can be fetched out of a grass field
one day and trained well enough to show himself off creditably in the
ring the next; and a rough raw colt makes both itself and its groom
look small. Training properly takes time and patience, and it is best
to begin early with the process, from birth for choice. The lessons
need not, and certainly should not, be either long or severe at the
outset, but just enough to teach the youngster what is required of him.
When teaching horses to stand at “attention” they should not be made to
stretch themselves out as if they were wanted to reach from one side
of the ring to the other, neither should they be allowed to stand like
an elephant on a tub. They should be taught to stand squarely on all
fours in a becoming and businesslike way. The best place for the groom
when a horse is wanted to stand still is exactly in front and facing
the animal. The rein is usually gripped about a foot from the head.
Mares can often be allowed a little more “head,” but with stallions
it may be better to take hold close to the bit, always remembering to
have the loop end of the rein in the palm, in case he suddenly rears
or plunges. The leader should “go with his horse,” or keep step with
him, but need not “pick up” in such a manner as to make it appear to
bystanders that he is trying to make up for the shortcomings of his
horse.

Both horse and man want to practise the performance in the home paddock
a good many times before perfection can be reached, and certainly
a little time thus spent is better than making a bad show when the
critical moment arrives that they are both called out to exhibit
themselves before a crowd of critics.

If well trained the horse will respond to the call of the judges with
only a word, and no whip or stick need be used to get it through the
required walks and trots, or back to its place in the rank.

There is a class of men who would profit by giving a little time to
training young horse stock, and that is the farmers who breed but do
not show. Of course, “professional show-men” (as they are sometimes
called) prefer to “buy their gems in the rough,” and put on the polish
themselves, and then take the profits for so doing. But why should not
the breeder make his animals show to their very best, and so get a
better price into his own pocket?

Finally, I would respectfully suggest that if some of the horse show
societies were to have a horse-showing competition, _i.e._ give prizes
to the men who showed out a horse in the best manner, it would be both
interesting and instructive to horse lovers.




CHAPTER IX

ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF THE SHIRE


It is evident that a breed of comparatively heavy horses existed in
Britain at the time of the Roman Invasion, when Queen Boadicea’s
warriors met Cæsar’s fighting men (who were on foot) in war chariots
drawn by active but powerful horses, remarkable--as Sir Walter Gilbey’s
book on “The Great Horse” says--for “strength, substance, courage and
docility.”

These characteristics have been retained and improved upon all down the
ages since. The chariot with its knives, or blades, to mow down the
enemy was superseded by regiments of cavalry, the animals ridden being
the Old English type of War Horse. In those days it was the lighter or
second-rate animals, what we may call “the culls,” which were left for
agricultural purposes. The English knight, when clad in armour, weighed
something like 4 cwt., therefore a weedy animal would have sunk under
such a burden.

This evidently forced the early breeders to avoid long backs by
breeding from strong-loined, deep-ribbed and well coupled animals,
seeing that slackness meant weakness and, therefore, worthlessness for
war purposes.

It is easy to understand that a long-backed, light-middled mount with
a weight of 4 cwt. on his back would simply double up when stopped
suddenly by the rider to swing his battle axe at the head of his
antagonist, so we find from pictures and plates that the War Horse of
those far-off days was wide and muscular in his build, very full in his
thighs, while the saddle in use reached almost from the withers to the
hips, thus proving that the back was short.

There came a time, however, when speed and mobility were preferred to
mere weight. The knight cast away his armour and selected a lighter and
fleeter mount than the War Horse of the ancient Britons.

The change was, perhaps, began at the battle of Bannockburn in 1314.
It is recorded that Robert Bruce rode a “palfrey” in that battle, on
which he dodged the charges of the ponderous English knights, and
he took a very heavy toll, not only of English warriors but of their
massive horses; therefore it is not unreasonable to suppose that some
of the latter were used for breeding purposes, and thus helped to build
up the Scottish, or Clydesdale, breed of heavy horses; but what was
England’s loss became Scotland’s gain, in that the Clydesdale breed had
a class devoted to it at the Highland Society’s Show in 1823, whereas
his English relative, “the Shire,” did not receive recognition by the
Royal Agricultural Society of England till 1883, sixty years later. As
a War Horse the British breed known as “The Great Horse” seems to have
been at its best between the Norman Conquest, 1066, and the date of
Bannockburn above-mentioned, owing to the fact that the Norman nobles,
who came over with William the Conqueror, fought on horseback, whereas
the Britons of old used to dismount out of their chariots, and fight on
foot. The Battle of Hastings was waged between Harold’s English Army of
infantry-men and William the Conqueror’s Army of horsemen, ending in a
victory for the latter.

The Flemish horses thus became known to English horse breeders, and
they were certainly used to help lay the foundation of the Old English
breed of cart horses.

It is clear that horses with substance were used for drawing chariots
at the Roman invasion in the year 55 B.C., but no great development
in horse-breeding took place in England till the Normans proved that
warriors could fight more effectively on horseback than on foot. After
this the noblemen of England appear to have set store by their horses,
consequently the twelfth and thirteenth centuries may be regarded
as the age in which Britain’s breed of heavy horses became firmly
established.

In Sir Walter Gilbey’s book is a quotation showing that “Cart Horses
fit for the dray, the plough, or the chariot” were on sale at
Smithfield (London) every Friday, the extract being made from a book
written about 1154, and from the same source we learn that during the
reign of King John, 1199-1216, a hundred stallions “of large stature”
were imported from the low countries--Flanders and Holland.

Passing from this large importation to the time of the famous Robert
Bakewell of Dishley (1726-1795), we find that he too went to Flanders
for stock to improve his cart horses, but instead of returning
with stallions he bought mares, which he mated with his stallions,
these being of the old black breed peculiar--in those days--to
Leicestershire. There is no doubt that the interest taken by this great
breed improver in the Old English type of cart horse had an effect far
more important than it did in the case of the Longhorn breed of cattle,
seeing that this has long lost its popularity, whereas that of the
Shire horse has been growing and widening from that day to this.

Bakewell was the first English stockbreeder to let his stud animals for
the season, and although his greatest success was achieved with the
Dishley or “New Leicester” sheep, he also carried on the system with
Longhorn bulls and his cart horses, which were described as “Bakewell’s
Blacks.”

That his horses had a reputation is proved by the fact that in 1785
he had the honour of exhibiting a black horse before King George III.
at St. James’s Palace, but another horse named “K,” said by Marshall
to have died in that same year, 1785, at the age of nineteen years,
was described by the writer just quoted as a better animal than that
inspected by His Majesty the King. From the description given he
appears to have had a commanding forehand and to have carried his head
so high that his ears stood perpendicularly over his fore feet, as
Bakewell held that the head of a cart horse should. It can hardly be
questioned that he was a believer in weight, seeing that his horses
were “thick and short in body, on very short legs.”

The highest price he is credited with getting for the hire of a
stallion for a season is 150 guineas, while the service fee at home is
said to have been five guineas, which looks a small amount compared
with the 800 guineas obtained for the use of his ram “Two Pounder” for
a season.

What is of more importance to Shire horse breeders, however, is the
fact that Robert Bakewell not only improved and popularized the Shire
horse of his day, but he instituted the system of letting out sires
for the season, which has been the means of placing good sires before
farmers, thus enabling them to assist in the improvement which has made
such strides since the formation of the Shire Horse Society in 1878.

It is worth while to note that Bakewell’s horses were said to be
“perfectly gentle, willing workers, and of great power.” He held that
bad pullers were made so by bad management. He used two in front of
a Rotherham plough, the quantity ploughed being “four acres a day.”
Surely a splendid advertisement for the Shire as a plough horse.


FLEMISH BLOOD

In view of the fact that Flanders has been very much in the public eye
for the past few months owing to its having been converted into a vast
battlefield, it is interesting to remember that we English farmers of
to-day owe at least something of the size, substance and soundness of
our Shire horses to the Flemish horse breeders of bygone days. Bakewell
is known to have obtained marvellous results among his cattle and sheep
by means of in-breeding, therefore we may assume that he would not have
gone to the Continent for an outcross for his horses unless he regarded
such a step beneficial to the breed.

It is recorded by George Culley that a certain Earl of Huntingdon had
returned from the Low Countries--where he had been Ambassador--with a
set of black coach horses, mostly stallions. These were used by the
Trentside farmers, and without a doubt so impressed Bakewell as to
induce him to pay a visit to the country whence they came.

If we turn from the history of the Shire to that of the Clydesdale it
will be found that the imported Flemish stallions are credited by the
most eminent authorities, with adding size to the North British breed
of draught horses.

The Dukes of Hamilton were conspicuous for their interest in horse
breeding. One was said to have imported six black Flemish stallions--to
cross with the native mares--towards the close of the seventeenth
century, while the sixth duke, who died in 1758, imported one, which he
named “Clyde.”

This is notable, because it proves that both the English and Scotch
breeds have obtained size from the very country now devastated by war.

It may be here mentioned that one of the greatest lovers and breeders
of heavy horses during the nineteenth century was schooled on the Duke
of Hamilton’s estate, and he was eminently successful in blending the
Shire and Clydesdale breeds to produce prizewinners and sires which
have done much towards building up the modern Clydesdale.

This was Mr. Lawrence Drew, of Merryton, who, like Mr. Robert Bakewell,
had the distinction of exhibiting a stallion (named Prince of Wales)
before Royalty.

It is well known that he (Mr. Drew) bought many Shires in the Midland
Counties of England. So keen was his judgment that he would “spot a
winner” from a railway carriage, and has been known to alight at the
next station and make the journey back to the farm where he saw the
likely animal.

On at least one occasion the farmer would not sell the best by itself,
so the enthusiast bought the whole team, which he had seen at plough
from the carriage window on the railway.

Quite the most celebrated Shire stallion purchased by Mr. Drew in
England was Lincolnshire Lad 1196, who died in his possession in 1878.
This horse won several prizes in Derbyshire before going north, and he
also begot Lincolnshire Lad II. 1365, the sire of Harold 3703, Champion
of the London Show of 1887, who in turn begot Rokeby Harold (Champion
in London as a yearling, a three-year-old and a four-year-old),
Markeaton Royal Harold, the Champion of 1897, and of Queen of the
Shires, the Champion mare of the same year, 1897, and numerous other
celebrities. A great mare, bought by Mr. Drew in Derbyshire, was Flora,
by Lincolnshire Lad, who became the dam of Pandora, a great winner, and
the dam of Prince of Clay, Handsome Prince, and Pandora’s Prince, all
of which were Clydesdale stallions and stock-getters of the first rank.

There is evidence to show that heavy horses from other countries than
Flanders were imported, but this much is perfectly clear, that the
Flemish breed was selected to impart size, therefore, if we give honour
where it is due, these “big and handsome” black stallions that we read
of deserve credit for helping to build up the breed of draught horses
in Britain, which is universally known as the Shire, its distinguishing
feature being that it is the heaviest breed in existence.




CHAPTER X

FACTS AND FIGURES


The London Show of 1890 was a remarkable one in more than one sense.
The entries totalled 646 against 447 the previous year. This led to the
adoption of measures to prevent exhibitors from making more than two
entries in one class. The year 1889 holds the record, so far, for the
number of export certificates granted by the Shire Horse Society, the
total being 1264 against 346 in 1913, yet Shires were much dearer in
the latter year than in the former.

Twenty-five years ago the number of three-year-old stallions shown in
London was 161, while two-year-olds totalled 134, hence the rule of
charging double fees for more than two entries from one exhibitor.

Another innovation was the passing of a rule that every animal entered
for show should be passed by a veterinary surgeon, this being the form
of certificate drawn up:--

    “I hereby certify that ________ entered by Mr. ________ for
    exhibition at the Shire Horse Society’s London Show, 1891,
    has been examined by me and, in my opinion, is free from the
    following hereditary diseases, viz: Roaring (whistling),
    Ringbone, Unsound Feet, Navicular Disease, Spavin, Cataract,
    Sidebone, Shivering.”

These alterations led to a smaller show in 1891 (which was the first at
which the writer had the honour of leading round a candidate, exhibited
by a gentleman who subsequently bred several London winners, and who
served on the Council of the Shire Horse Society). But to hark back to
the 1890 Show. The Champion Stallion was Mr. A. B. Freeman-Mitford’s
(now Lord Redesdale) Hitchin Conqueror, one of whose sons, I’m the
Sort the Second, made £1000 at the show after winning third prize; the
second-prize colt in the same class being sold for £700.

The Champion mare was Starlight, then owned by Mr. R. N.
Sutton-Nelthorpe, but sold before the 1891 Show, at the Scawby sale,
for 925 guineas to Mr. Fred Crisp--who held a prominent place in the
Shire Horse world for several years. Starlight rewarded him by winning
Champion prize both in 1891 and 1892, her three successive victories
being a record in championships for females at the London Show. Others
have won highest honours thrice, but, so far, not in successive years.

In 1890 the number of members of the Shire Horse Society was 1615, the
amount given in prizes being just over £700. A curious thing about that
1890 meeting, with its great entry, was that it resulted in a loss of
£1300 to the Society, but in those days farmers did not attend in their
thousands as they do now.

The sum spent in 1914 was £2230, the number of members being 4200, and
the entries totalling 719, a similar sum being offered, at the time
this is being written, for distribution at the Shire Horse Show of
1915, which will be held when this country has, with the help of her
Allies, waged a great war for seven months, yet before it had been
carried on for seven days show committees in various parts of the
country cancelled their shows, being evidently under the impression
that “all was in the dust.” With horses of all grades at a premium, any
method of directing the attention of farmers and breeders generally
to the scarcity that is certain to exist is justifiable, particularly
that which provides for over two thousand pounds being spent among
members of what is admitted to be the most flourishing breed society in
existence.

At the London Show of 1895 two classes for geldings were added to
the prize schedule, making fifteen in all, but even with twenty-two
geldings the total was only 489, so that it was a small show, its most
notable feature being that Mr. A. B. Freeman-Mitford’s Minnehaha won
the Challenge Cup for mares and died later.

Up till the Show of 1898 both stallions and mares commenced with the
eldest, so that Class I was for stallions ten years old and upwards,
the yearlings coming last, the mare classes following in like order.
But for the 1898 Show a desirable change was made by putting the
yearlings first, and following on with classes in the order of age. At
this show, 1898, Sir Alexander Henderson performed the unique feat of
winning not only the male and female Challenge Cups, but also the other
two, so that he had four cup winners, three of them being sire, dam,
and son, viz. Markeaton Royal Harold, Aurea, and Buscot Harold, this
made the victory particularly noteworthy. The last named also succeeded
in winning champion honours in 1899 and 1900, thus rivalling Starlight.
The cup-winning gelding, Bardon Extraordinary, had won similar honours
the previous year for Mr. W. T. Everard, his owner in 1898 being Mr.
James Eadie. He possessed both weight and quality, and it is doubtful
if a better gelding has been exhibited since. He was also cup winner
again in 1899, consequently he holds the record for geldings at the
London Show.

It should have been mentioned that the system of giving breeders prizes
was introduced at the Show of 1896, the first prizes being reduced
from £25 to £20 in the case of stallions, and from £20 to £15 in those
for mares, to allow the breeder of the first prize animal £10 in each
breeding class, and the breeder of each second-prize stallion or mare
£5, the latter sum being awarded to breeders of first-prize geldings.
This was a move in the right direction, and certainly gave the Shire
Horse Society and its London Show a lift up in the eyes of farmers
who had bred Shires but had not exhibited. Since then they have never
lost their claim on any good animal they have bred, that is why they
flock to the Show in February from all parts of England, and follow the
judging with such keen interest; there is money in it.

This Show of 1896 was, therefore, one of the most important ever held.
It marked the beginning of a more democratic era in the history of the
Great Horse. The sum of £1142 was well spent.

By the year 1900 the prize money had reached a total of £1322, the
classes remaining as from 1895 with seven for stallions, six for
mares, and two for geldings. The next year, 1901, another class, for
mares 16 hands 2 inches and over, was added, and also another class
for geldings, resulting in a further rise to £1537 in prize money.
The sensation of this Show was the winning of the Championship by new
tenant-farmer exhibitors, Messrs. J. and M. Walwyn, with an unknown
two-year-old colt, Bearwardcote Blaze. This was a bigger surprise than
the success of Rokeby Harold as a yearling in 1893, as he had won
prizes for his breeder, Mr. A. C. Rogers, and for Mr. John Parnell
(at Ashbourne) before getting into Lord Belper’s possession, therefore
great things were expected of him, whereas the colt Bearwardcote Blaze
was a veritable “dark horse.” Captain Heaton, of Worsley, was one of
the judges, and subsequently purchased him for Lord Ellesmere.

The winning of the Championship by a yearling colt was much commented
on at the time (1893), but he was altogether an extraordinary colt. The
critics of that day regarded him as the best yearling Shire ever seen.
Said one, “We breed Shire horses every day, but a colt like this comes
only once in a lifetime.” Fortunately I saw him both in London and at
the Chester Royal, where he was also Champion, my interest being all
the greater because he was bred in Bucks, close to where I “sung my
first song.”

Of two-year-old champions there have been at least four, viz. Prince
William, in 1885; Buscot Harold, 1898; Bearwardcote Blaze, 1901; and
Champion’s Goalkeeper, 1913.

Three-year-olds have also won supreme honours fairly often. Those
within the writer’s recollection being Bury Victor Chief, in 1892,
after being first in his class for the two previous years, and reserve
champion in 1891; Rokeby Harold in 1895, who was Champion in 1893,
and cup winner in 1894; Buscot Harold, in 1899, thus repeating his
two-year-old performance; Halstead Royal Duke in 1909, the Royal
Champion as a two-year-old.

The 1909 Show was remarkable for the successes of Lord Rothschild, who
after winning one of the championships for the previous six years, now
took both of the Challenge Cups, the reserve championship, and the Cup
for the best old stallion.

The next and last three-year-old to win was, or is, the renowned
Champion’s Goalkeeper, who took the Challenge Cup in 1914 for the
second time.

When comparing the ages of the male and female champions of the London
Show, it is seen that while the former often reach the pinnacle of
fame in their youth, the latter rarely do till they have had time to
develop.




CHAPTER XI

HIGH PRICES


It is not possible to give particulars of sums paid for many animals
sold privately, as the amount is often kept secret, but a few may be
mentioned. The first purchase to attract great attention was that of
Prince William, by the late Lord Wantage from Mr. John Rowell in 1885
for £1500, or guineas, although Sir Walter Gilbey had before that given
a real good price to Mr. W. R. Rowland for the Bucks-bred Spark. The
next sensational private sale was that of Bury Victor Chief, the Royal
Champion of 1891, to Mr. Joseph Wainwright, the seller again being
Mr. John Rowell and the price 2500 guineas. In that same year, 1891,
Chancellor, one of Premier’s noted sons, made 1100 guineas at Mr. A.
C. Duncombe’s sale at Calwich, when eighteen of Premier’s sons and
daughters were paraded with their sire, and made an average, including
foals, of £273 each.

In 1892 a record in letting was set up by the Welshpool Shire Horse
Society, who gave Lord Ellesmere £1000 for the use of Vulcan (the
champion of the 1891 London Show) to serve 100 mares. This society
was said to be composed of “shrewd tenant farmers who expected a good
return for their money.” Since then a thousand pounds for a first-class
sire has been paid many times, and it is in districts where they have
been used that those in search of the best go for their foals. Two
notable instances can be mentioned, viz. Champion’s Goalkeeper and
Lorna Doone, the male and female champions of the London Show of 1914,
which were both bred in the Welshpool district. Other high-priced
stallions to be sold by auction in the nineties were Marmion to Mr.
Fred Crisp from Mr. Arkwright in 1892 for 1400 guineas, Waresley
Premier Duke to Mr. Victor Cavendish (now the Duke of Devonshire) for
1100 guineas at Mr. W. H. O. Duncombe’s sale in 1897, and a similar sum
by the same buyer for Lord Llangattock’s Hendre Crown Prince in the
same year.

For the next really high-priced stallion we must come to the dispersion
of the late Lord Egerton’s stud in April, 1909, when Messrs. W. and H.
Whitley purchased the five-year-old Tatton Dray King (London Champion
in 1908) for 3700 guineas, to join their celebrated Devonshire stud.
At this sale Tatton Herald, a two-year-old colt, made 1200 guineas to
Messrs. Ainscough, who won the championship with him at the Liverpool
Royal in 1910, but at the Royal Show of 1914 he figured, and won, as a
gelding.

As a general rule, however, these costly sires have proved well worth
their money.

As mentioned previously, the year 1913 will be remembered by the
fact that 4100 guineas was given at Lord Rothschild’s sale for the
two-year-old Shire colt Champion’s Goalkeeper, by Childwick Champion,
who, like Tatton Dray King and others, is likely to prove a good
investment at his cost. Twice since then he has championed the London
Show, and by the time these lines are read he may have accomplished
that great feat for the third time, his age being four years old in
1915.

Of mares, Starlight, previously mentioned, was the first to approach a
thousand pounds in an auction sale.

At the Shire Horse Show of 1893 the late Mr. Philo Mills exhibited
Moonlight, a mare which he had purchased privately for £1000, but she
only succeeded in getting a commended card, so good was the company in
which she found herself. The first Shire mare to make over a thousand
guineas at a stud sale was Dunsmore Gloaming, by Harold. This was at
the second Dunsmore Sale early in 1894, the price being 1010 guineas,
and the purchaser Mr. W. J. Buckley, Penyfai, Carmarthen, from whom
she was repurchased by the late Sir P. Albert Muntz, and was again
included in the Dunsmore catalogue of January 27, 1898, when she
realized 780 guineas, Sir J. Blundell Maple being the lucky purchaser,
the word being used because she won the challenge cup in London, both
in 1899 and 1900. Foaled in 1890 at Sandringham, by Harold (London
Champion), dam by Staunton Hero (London Champion), she was sold at
King Edward’s first sale in 1892 for 200 guineas. As a three- and
a four-year-old she was second in London, and she also won second
prize as a seven-year-old for Sir P. A. Muntz, finally winning supreme
honours at nine and ten years of age, a very successful finish to a
distinguished career. On February 11th, 1898, another record was set by
His Majesty King Edward VII., whose three-year-old filly Sea Breeze, by
the same sire as Bearwardcote Blaze, made 1150 guineas, Sir J. Blundell
Maple again being the buyer. The next mare to make four figures at a
stud sale was Hendre Crown Princess at the Lockinge sale of February
14, 1900, the successful bidder being Mr. H. H. Smith-Carington,
Ashby Folville, Melton Mowbray, who has bought and bred many good
Shires. The price was 1100 guineas. This date, February 14, seems to
be a particularly lucky one for Shire sales, for besides the one just
mentioned Lord Rothschild has held at least two sales on February 14.
In 1908 the yearling colt King Cole VII. was bought by the late Lord
Winterstoke for 900 guineas, the highest price realized by the stud
sales of that year. Then there is the record sale at Tring Park on
February 14, 1913, when one stallion, Champions Goalkeeper, made 4100
guineas, and another, Blacklands Kingmaker, 1750.

The honour for being the highest priced Shire mare sold at a stud sale
belongs to the great show mare, Pailton Sorais, for which Sir Arthur
Nicholson gave 1200 guineas at the dispersion sale of Mr. Max Michaelis
at Tandridge, Surrey, on October 26, 1911. It will be remembered by
Shire breeders that she made a successful appearance in London each
year from one to eight years old, her list being: First, as a yearling;
sixth, as a two-year-old; second, as a three-year-old; first and
reserve champion at four years old, five and seven; first in her class
at six. She was not to be denied the absolute championship, however,
and it fell to her in 1911. No Shire in history has achieved greater
distinction than this, not even Honest Tom 1105, who won first prize
at the Royal Show six years in succession, as the competition in those
far-off days was much less keen than that which Pailton Sorais had to
face, and it should be mentioned that she was also a good breeder,
the foal by her side when she was sold made 310 guineas and another
daughter 400 guineas.

Such are the kind of Shire mares that farmers want. Those that will
work, win, and breed. As we have seen in this incomplete review, Aurea
won the championship of the London show, together with her son. Belle
Cole, the champion mare of 1908, bred a colt which realized 900 guineas
as a yearling a few days before she herself gained her victory, a clear
proof that showing and breeding are not incompatible.




CHAPTER XII

A FEW RECORDS


The highest priced Shires sold by auction have already been given. So a
few of the most notable sales may be mentioned, together with the dates
they were held--

                                                     £   _s._ _d._
    Tring Park (draft), February 14, 1913:
                               32 Shires averaged   454   0    0
    Tatton Park (dispersion), April 23, 1909:
                               21 Shires averaged   465   0    0
    Tring Park (draft), February 14, 1905:
                               35 Shires averaged   266  15    0
    The Hendre, Monmouth (draft), October 18, 1900:
                               42 Shires averaged   226   0    0
    Sandringham (draft), February 11, 1898:
                               52 Shires averaged   224   7    9
    Tring Park (draft), January 15, 1902:
                               40 Shires averaged   217  14    0
    Tring Park (draft), January 12, 1898:
                               35 Shires averaged   209  18    2
    Dunsmore (dispersion), February 11, 1909:
                               51 Shires averaged   200  12    0
    Childwick (draft), February 13, 1901:
                               46 Shires averaged   200   0    0
    Tandridge (dispersion), October 28, 1911:
                               84 Shires averaged   188  17    6

These ten are worthy of special mention, although there are several
which come close up to the £200 average. That given first is the most
noteworthy for the reason that Lord Rothschild only sold a portion of
his stud, whereas the executors of the late Lord Egerton of Tatton
sold their whole lot of twenty-one head, hence the higher average.
Two clear records were, however, set up at the historical Tring Park
sale in 1913, viz. the highest individual price for a stallion and the
highest average price for animals by one sire, seven sons and daughters
of Childwick Champion, making no less than £927 each, including two
yearling colts.

The best average of the nineteenth century was that made at its close
by the late Lord Llangattock, who had given a very high price privately
for Prince Harold, by Harold, which, like his sire, was a very
successful stock horse, his progeny making a splendid average at this
celebrated sale. A spirited bidder at all of the important sales and a
very successful exhibitor, Lord Llangattock did not succeed in winning
either of the London Championships.

One private sale during 1900 is worth mentioning, which was that of Mr.
James Eadie’s two cup-winning geldings, Bardon Extraordinary and Barrow
Farmer for 225 guineas each, a price which has only been equalled once
to the writer’s knowledge. This was in the autumn of 1910, when Messrs.
Truman gave 225 guineas for a gelding, at Messrs. Manley’s Repository,
Crewe, this specimen of the English lorry horse being bought for export
to the United States.

In 1894 the late Lord Wantage held a sale which possessed unique
features in that fifty animals catalogued were all sired by the dual
London Champion and Windsor Royal (Jubilee Show) Gold Medal Winner,
Prince William, to whom reference has already been made. The average
was just over £116. As a great supporter of the old English breed, Lord
Wantage, K.C.B., a Crimean veteran, deserves to be bracketed with the
recently deceased Sir Walter Gilbey, inasmuch as that in 1890 he gave
the Lockinge Cup for the best Shire mare exhibited at the London show,
which Starlight succeeded in winning outright for Mr. Fred Crisp in
1892.

Sir Walter Gilbey gave the Elsenham Cup for the best stallion, value
100 guineas, in 1884, which, however, was not won permanently till the
late Earl of Ellesmere gained his second championship with Vulcan in
1891. Since these dates the Shire Horse Society has continued to give
the Challenge Cups both for the best stallion and mare.

The sales hitherto mentioned have been those of landowners, but it must
not be supposed that tenant farmers have been unable to get Shires
enough to call a home sale. On February 5, 1890, Mr. A. H. Clark sold
fifty-one Shires at Moulton Eaugate, the average being £127 5_s._, the
striking feature of this sale being the number of grey (Thumper) mares.

In February, 1901, Mr. Clark and Mr. F. W. Griffin, another very
successful farmer breeder in the Fens, held a joint sale at Postland,
the former’s average being £100 6_s._ 9_d._, and the latter’s £123
9_s._ 8_d._, each selling twenty-five animals.

The last home sale held by a farmer was that of Mr. Matthew Hubbard
at Eaton, Grantham, on November 1, 1912, when an average of £73 was
obtained for fifty-seven lots.

Reference has already been made to Harold, Premier, and Prince William,
as sires, but there have been others equally famous since the Shire
Horse Society has been in existence. Among them may be mentioned Bar
None, who won at the 1882 London Show for the late Mr. James Forshaw,
stood for service at his celebrated Carlton Stud Farm for a dozen
seasons, and is credited with having sired over a thousand foals. They
were conspicuous for flat bone and silky feather, when round cannon
bones and curly hair were much more common than they are to-day,
therefore both males and females by Bar None were highly prized; £2000
was refused for at least one of his sons, while a two-year-old daughter
made 800 guineas in 1891. For several years the two sires of Mr. A. C.
Duncombe, at Calwich, Harold and Premier, sired many winners, and in
those days the Ashbourne Foal Show was worth a journey to see.

In 1899 Sir P. Albert Muntz took first prize in London with a
big-limbed yearling, Dunsmore Jameson, who turned out to be the sire
of strapping yearlings, two- and three-year-olds, which carried all
before them in the show ring for several years, and a three-year-old
son made the highest price ever realized at any of the Dunsmore Sales,
when the stud was dispersed in 1909. This was 1025 guineas given by
Lord Middleton for Dunsmore Jameson II. For four years in succession,
1903 to 1906, Dunsmore Jameson sired the highest number of winners, not
only in London, but at all the principal shows. His service fee was
fifteen guineas to “approved mares only,” a high figure for a horse
which had only won at the Shire Horse Show as a yearling. Among others
he sired Dunsmore Raider, who in turn begot Dunsmore Chessie, Champion
mare at the London Shows of 1912 and 1913. Jameson contained the blood
of Lincolnshire Lad on both sides of his pedigree. By the 1907 show
another sire had come to the front, and his success was phenomenal;
this was Lockinge Forest King, bred by the late Lord Wantage in 1889,
purchased by the late Mr. J. P. Cross, of Catthorpe Towers, Rugby, who
won first prize, and reserve for the junior cup with him in London as
a three-year-old, also first and champion at the (Carlisle) Royal
Show the same year, 1902. It is worth while to study the breeding of
Lockinge Forest King.

_Sire_--Lockinge Manners.

_Grand sire_--Prince Harold.

_Great grand sire_--Harold.

_Great great grand sire_--Lincolnshire Lad II. 1365.

_Great great great grand sire_--Lincolnshire Lad 1196 (Drew’s).

The dam of Lockinge Forest King was The Forest Queen (by Royal Albert,
1885, a great sire in his day); she was first prize winner at the Royal
Show, Nottingham, 1888, first and champion, Peterborough, 1888, first
Bath and West, 1887 and 1888, and numerous other prizes. Her dam traced
back to (Dack’s) Matchless (1509), a horse which no less an authority
than the late Mr. James Forshaw described as “the sire of all time.”

This accounts for the marvellous success of Lockinge Forest King as a
stud horse, although his success, unlike Jameson’s, came rather late in
his life of ten years. He died in 1909. We have already seen that he
has sired the highest priced Shire mare publicly sold. At the Newcastle
Royal of 1908, both of the gold medal winners were by him, so were
the two champions at the 1909 Shire Horse Show. His most illustrious
family was bred by a tenant farmer, Mr. John Bradley, Halstead, Tilton,
Leicester. The eldest member is Halstead Royal Duke, the London
Champion of 1909, Halstead Blue Blood, 3rd in London, 1910, both owned
by Lord Rothschild, and Halstead Royal Duchess, who won the junior cup
in London for her breeder in 1912. The dam of the trio is Halstead
Duchess III by Menestrel, by Hitchin Conqueror (London Champion, 1890).

Two other matrons deserve to be mentioned, as they will always shine in
the history of the Shire breed. One is Lockington Beauty by Champion
457, who died at a good old age at Batsford Park, having produced
Prince William, the champion referred to more than once in these pages,
his sire being William the Conqueror. Then Marmion II (by Harold),
who was first in London in 1891, and realized 1400 guineas at Mr.
Arkwright’s sale. Also a daughter, Blue Ruin, which won at London Show
of 1889 for Mr. R. N. Sutton-Nelthorpe, but, unfortunately, died from
foaling in that year. Another famous son was Mars Victor, a horse of
great size, and also a London winner, on more than one occasion. He was
purchased by Mr. (Sir) Walter Gilbey from Mr. Freeman-Mitford (Lord
Redesdale) in the year of his sire’s--Hitchin Conqueror’s--championship
in 1890, for the sum of £1500. Another was Momus by Laughing Stock.
Blue Ruin was own sister to Prince William, but the other three were by
different sires.

To look at--I saw her in 1890--Lockington Beauty was quite a common
mare with obviously small knees, and none too much weight and width,
her distinguishing feature being a mane of extraordinary length.

The remaining dam to be mentioned as a great breeder is Nellie
Blacklegs by Bestwick’s Prince, famous for having bred five sons--which
were all serving mares in the year 1891--and a daughter, all by
Premier. The first was Northwood, a horse used long and successfully by
Lord Middleton and the sire of Birdsall Darling, the dam of Birdsall
Menestrel, London champion of 1904. The second, Hydrometer, first
in London in 1889, then sold to the late Duke of Marlborough, and
purchased when his stud was dispersed in 1893 by the Warwick Shire
Horse Society for 600 guineas. Then came Chancellor, sold at Mr. A.
C. Duncombe’s sale in 1891 for 1100 guineas, a record in those days,
to Mr. F. Crisp, who let him to the Peterborough Society in 1892 for
£500. Calwich Topsman, another son, realized 500 guineas when sold, and
Senator made 350. The daughter, rightly named “Sensible,” bred Mr. John
Smith of Ellastone, Ashbourne, a colt foal by Harold in 1893, which
turned out to be Markeaton Royal Harold, the champion stallion of 1897.
This chapter was headed “A few records,” and surely this set up by
Premier and Nellie Blacklegs is one.

The record show of the Shire Horse Society, as regards the number of
entries, was that of 1904, with a total of 862; the next for size was
the 1902 meeting when 860 were catalogued. Of course the smallest
show was the initial one of 1880, when 76 stallions and 34 mares made
a total of 110 entries. The highest figure yet made in the public
auction sales held at the London Show is 1175 guineas given by Mr.
R. Heath, Biddulph Grange, Staffs., in 1911 for Rickford Coming
King, a three-year-old bred by the late Lord Winterstoke, and sold by
his executors, after having won fourth in his class, although first
and reserve for the junior cup as a two-year-old. He was sired by
Ravenspur, with which King Edward won first prize in London, 1906,
his price of 825 guineas to Lord Winterstoke at the Wolferton Sale
of February 8, 1907, being the highest at any sale of that year. The
lesson to be learned is that if you want to create a record with Shires
you must begin and continue with well-bred ones, or you will never
reach the desired end.




CHAPTER XIII

JUDGES AT THE LONDON SHOWS, 1890-1915


The following are the Judges of a quarter of a century’s Shires in
London:--

    1890. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Chapman, George, Radley, Hungerford, Berks.
          Morton, John, West Rudham, Swaffham, Norfolk.
          Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire.

    1891. Blundell, Peter, Ream Hills, Weeton Kirkham, Lancs.
          Hill, Joseph B., Smethwick Hall, Congleton, Cheshire.
          Morton, Joseph, Stow, Downham Market, Norfolk.
          Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts.

    1892. Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester.
          Morton, John, West Rudham, Swaffham, Norfolk.
          Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire.
          Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs.

    1893. Byron, A. W., Duckmanton Lodge, Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
          Crowther, James F., Knowl Grove, Mirfield, Yorks.
          Douglas, C. I., 34, Dalebury Road, Upper Tooting, London.
          Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts.

    1894. Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester.
          Chamberlain, C. R., Riddings Farm, Alfreton, Derbyshire.
          Tindall, C. W., Brocklesby Park, Lincs.
          Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs.

    1895. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs.
          Rowell, John, Manor Farm, Bury, Huntingdon.
          Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts.

    1896. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool.
          Potter, W. H., Barberry House, Ullesthorpe, Rugby.
          Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs.

    1897. Chamberlain, C. R., Riddings Farm, Alfreton, Derbyshire.
          Lewis, John, Trwstllewelyn, Garthmyl, Mont.
          Wainwright, Joseph, Corbar, Buxton, Derbyshire.

    1898. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs.
          Richardson, Wm., London Road, Chatteris, Cambs.

    1899. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool.
          Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough.
          Welch, William, North Rauceby, Grantham, Lincs.

    1900. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Forshaw, James, Carlton-on-Trent, Newark, Notts.
          Paisley, Joseph, Waresley, Sandy, Beds.

    1901. Eadie, J. T. C., Barrow Hall, Derby.
          Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester.
          Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs.

    1902. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough.
          Rowell, John, Manor Farm, Bury, Huntingdon.

    1903. Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire.
          Richardson, William, Eastmoor House, Doddington, Cambs.
          Grimes, Joseph, Highfield, Palterton, Chesterfield, Derbyshire.

    1904. Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs.
          Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts.
          Whinnerah, James, Warton Hall, Carnforth, Lancs.

    1905. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Blundell, John, Ream Hills, Weeton Kirkham, Lancs.
          Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool.

    1906. Eadie, J. T. C., The Knowle, Hazelwood, Derby.
          Rowell, John, Bury, Huntingdon.
          Green, Thomas, The Bank, Pool Quay, Welshpool.

    1907. Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough.
          Paisley, Joseph, Moresby House, Whitehaven.
          Whinnerah, Edward, Warton Hall, Carnforth, Lancs.

    1908. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs.
          Howkins, W., Hillmorton Grounds, Rugby.

    1909. Eadie, J. T. C., The Rock, Newton Solney, Burton-on-Trent.
          Rowell, John, Bury, Huntingdon.
          Thompson, W., jun., Desford, Leicester.

    1910. Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs.
          Cowing, G., Yatesbury, Calne, Wilts.
          Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool.

    1911. Green, Thomas, The Bank, Pool Quay, Welshpool.
          Gould, James, Crouchley Lymm, Cheshire.
          Measures, John, Dunsby, Bourne, Lincs.

    1912. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs.
          Flowers, A. J., Beachendon, Aylesbury, Bucks.
          Whinnerah, Edward Warton, Carnforth, Lancs.

    1913. Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs.
          Betts, E. W., Babingley, King’s Lynn, Norfolk.
          Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough.

    1914. Forshaw, Thomas, Carlton-on-Trent, Newark, Notts.
          Keene, R. H., Westfield, Medmenham, Marlow, Bucks.
          Thompson, William, jun., Kibworth Beauchamp, Leicester.

    1915. Eadie, J. T. C., Newton Solney, Burton-on-Trent.
          Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool.
          Mackereth, Henry Whittington, Kirkby Lonsdale, Lancs.

This list is interesting for the reason that those who have awarded
the prizes at the Shire Horse Show have, to a great extent, fixed the
type to find favour at other important shows. Very often the same
judges have officiated at several important exhibitions during the
same season, which has tended towards uniformity in prize-winning
Shires. On looking down the list, it will be seen that four judges
were appointed till 1895, while the custom of the Society to get its
Council from as many counties as possible has not been followed in
the matter of judges’ selection. For instance, Warwickshire--a great
county for Shire breeding--has only provided two judges in twenty-six
years, and one of them--Mr. Potter--had recently come from Lockington
Grounds, Derby, where he bred the renowned Prince William. For many
years Hertfordshire has provided a string of winners, yet no judge has
hailed from that county, or from Surrey, which contains quite a number
of breeders of Shire horses. No fault whatever is being found with the
way the judging has been carried out. It is no light task, and nobody
but an expert could, or should, undertake it; but it is only fair to
point out that high-class Shires are, and have been, bred in Cornwall,
and Devonshire, Kent, and every other county, while the entries at the
show of 1914 included a stallion bred in the Isle of Man.

In 1890, as elsewhere stated, the membership of the Society was 1615,
whereas the number of members given in the 1914 volume of the Stud Book
is 4200. The aim of each and all is “to improve the Old English breed
of Cart Horses,” many of which may now be truthfully described by their
old title of “War Horses.”




CHAPTER XIV

THE EXPORT TRADE


Among the first to recognize the enormous power and possibilities of
the Shire were the Americans. Very few London shows had been held
before they were looking out for fully-registered specimens to take
across the Atlantic. Towards the close of the ’eighties a great export
trade was done, the climax being reached in 1889, when the Shire Horse
Society granted 1264 export certificates. A society to safeguard the
interests of the breed was formed in America, these being the remarks
of Mr. A. Galbraith (President of the American Shire Horse Society) in
his introductory essay: “At no time in the history of the breed have
first-class animals been so valuable as now, the praiseworthy endeavour
to secure the best specimens of the breed having the natural effect of
enhancing prices all round. Breeders of Shire horses both in England
and America have a hopeful and brilliant future before them, and by
exercising good judgment in their selections, and giving due regard to
pedigree and soundness, as well as individual merit, they will not only
reap a rich pecuniary reward, but prove a blessing and a benefit to
this country.”

From the day that the Shire Horse Society was incorporated, on June
3, 1878, until now, America has been Britain’s best overseas customer
for Shire horses, a good second being our own colony, the Dominion of
Canada. Another stockbreeding country to make an early discovery of the
merits of “The Great Horse” was Argentina, to which destination many
good Shires have gone. In 1906 the number given in the Stud Book was
118. So much importance is attached to the breed both in the United
States and in the Argentine Republic that English judges have travelled
to each of those country’s shows to award the prizes in the Shire
Classes.

Another great country with which a good and growing trade has been done
is Russia. In 1904 the number was eleven, in 1913 it had increased to
fifty-two, so there is evidently a market there which is certain to be
extended when peace has been restored and our powerful ally sets about
the stupendous, if peaceful, task of replenishing her horse stock.

Our other allies have their own breeds of draught horses, therefore
they have not been customers for Shires, but with war raging in their
breeding grounds, the numbers must necessarily be reduced almost to
extinction, consequently the help of the Shire may be sought for
building up their breeds in days to come.

German buyers have not fancied Shire horses to any extent--British-bred
re-mounts have been more in their line.

In 1905, however, Germany was the destination of thirty-one. By 1910
the number had declined to eleven, and in 1913 to three, therefore, if
the export of trade in Shires to “The Fatherland” is altogether lost,
English breeders will scarcely feel it.

Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa are parts of the British
Empire to which Shires have been shipped for several years. Substantial
prizes in the shape of Cups and Medals are now given by the Shire
Horse Society to the best specimens of the breed exhibited at Foreign
and Colonial Shows.


ENCOURAGING THE EXPORT OF SHIRES

The following is reprinted from the “Farmer and Stockbreeder Year Book”
for 1906, and was written by S. H. L. (J. A. Frost):--

    “The Old English breed of cart horse, or ‘Shire,’ is
    universally admitted to be the best and most valuable animal
    for draught purposes in the world, and a visitor from America,
    Mr. Morrow, of the United States Department of Agriculture,
    speaking at Mr. John Rowell’s sale of Shires in 1889, said,
    ‘Great as had been the business done in Shire horses in
    America, the trade is but in its infancy, for the more Shire
    horses became known, and the more they came into competition
    with other breeds, the more their merits for all heavy draught
    purposes were appreciated.’

    “These remarks are true to-day, for although sixteen years have
    elapsed since they were made (1906), the massive Shire has more
    than held his own, but in the interests of the breed, and of
    the nearly four thousand members of the Shire Horse Society,
    it is still doubtful whether the true worth of the Shire
    horse is properly known and appreciated in foreign countries
    and towns needing heavy horses, and whether the export trade
    in this essentially British breed is not capable of further
    development. The number of export certificates granted by the
    Shire Horse Society in 1889 was 1264, which takes a good deal
    of beating, but it must be remembered that since then Shire
    horse breeding at home has progressed by leaps and bounds,
    and tenant farmers, who could only look on in those days,
    are now members of the flourishing Shire Horse Society and
    owners of breeding studs, and such prices as 800 guineas for a
    two-year-old filly and 230 guineas for a nine-months-old colt,
    are less frequently obtainable than they were then; therefore,
    an increase in the demand from other countries would find more
    Shire breeders ready to supply it, although up to the present
    the home demand has been and is very good, and weighty geldings
    continue to be scarce and dear.”


THE NUMBER EXPORTED

“It may be true that the number of horses exported during the last year
or two has been higher than ever, but when the average value of those
that go to ‘other countries’ than Holland, Belgium, and France, is
worked out, it does not allow of such specimens as would excite the
admiration of a foreign merchant or Colonial farmer being exported,
except in very isolated instances; then the tendency of American buyers
is to give preference to stallions which are on the quality rather than
on the weighty side, and as the mares to which they are eventually put
are also light boned, the typical English dray horse is not produced.

“During the past year (1905) foreign buyers have been giving very
high prices for Shorthorn cattle, and if they would buy in the same
spirited manner at the Shire sales, a much more creditable animal
could be obtained for shipment. As an advertisement for the Shire
it is obviously beneficial that the Shire Horse Society--which is
unquestionably the most successful breed society in existence--gives
prizes for breeding stock and also geldings at a few of the most
important horse shows in the United States. This tends to bring the
breed into prominence abroad, and it is certain that many Colonial
farmers would rejoice at being able to breed working geldings of a
similar type to those which may be seen shunting trucks on any large
railway station in England, or walking smartly along in front of a
binder in harvest. The writer has a relative farming in the North-West
Territory of Canada, and his last letter says, ‘The only thing in
the stock line that there is much money in now is horses; they are
keeping high, and seem likely to for years, as so many new settlers are
coming in all the time, and others do not seem able to raise enough
for their own needs’; and it may be mentioned that almost the only
kind of stallions available there are of the Percheron breed, which
is certainly not calculated to improve the size, or substance, of the
native draught horse stock.


THE COST OF SHIPPING

“The cost of shipping a horse from Liverpool to New York is about £11,
which is not prohibitive for such an indispensable animal as the Shire
horse, and if such specimens of the breed as the medal winners at shows
like Peterborough could be exhibited in the draught horse classes at
the best horse shows of America, it is more than probable that at least
some of the visitors would be impressed with their appearance, and an
increase in the export trade in Shires might thereby be brought about.

“A few years ago the price of high-class Shire stallions ran upwards of
a thousand pounds, which placed them beyond the reach of exporters;
but the reign of what may be called ‘fancy’ prices appears to be
over, at least for a time, seeing that the general sale averages have
declined since that of Lord Llangattock in October, 1900, when the
record average of £226 1_s._ 8_d._ was made, although the best general
average for the sales of any single year was obtained in 1901, viz.
£112 5_s._ 10_d._ for 633 animals, and it was during that year that the
highest price for Shires was obtained at an auction sale, the sum being
1550 guineas, given by Mr. Leopold Salomons, for the stallion Hendre
Champion, at the late Mr. Crisp’s sale at Girton. Other high-priced
stallions purchased by auction include Marmion II., 1400 guineas, and
Chancellor, 1100 guineas, both by Mr. Crisp. Waresley Premier Duke,
1100 guineas, and Hendre Crown Prince, 1100 guineas, were two purchases
of Mr. Victor Cavendish in the year 1897. These figures show that the
worth of a really good Shire stallion can hardly be estimated, and
it is certain that the market for this particular class of animal is
by no means glutted, but rather the reverse, as the number of males
offered at the stud sales is always limited, which proves that there
is ‘room on the top’ for the stallion breeder, and with this fact in
view and the possible chance of an increased foreign trade in stallions
it behoves British breeders of Shires to see to it that there is no
falling off in the standard of the horses ‘raised,’ to use the American
word, but rather that a continual improvement is aimed at, so that
visitors from horse-breeding countries may find what they want if they
come to ‘the stud farm of the world.’

“The need to keep to the right lines and breed from good old stock
which has produced real stock-getting stallions cannot be too strongly
emphasised, for the reason that there is a possibility of the British
market being overstocked with females, with a corresponding dearth of
males, both stallions and geldings, and although this is a matter which
breeders cannot control they can at least patronise a strain of blood
famous for its males. The group of Premier--Nellie Blacklegs’ brothers,
Northwood, Hydrometer, Senator, and Calwich Topsman--may be quoted as
showing the advisability of continuing to use the same horse year after
year if colt foals are bred, and wanted, and the sire is a horse of
merit.

“With the number of breeders of Shire horses and the plentiful supply
of mares, together with the facilities offered by local stallion-hiring
societies, it ought not to be impossible to breed enough high-grade
sires to meet the home demand and leave a surplus for export as well,
and the latter of the class that will speak for themselves in other
countries, and lead to enquiries for more of the same sort.


FEW HIGH PRICES FROM EXPORTERS

“It is noteworthy that few, if any, of the high prices obtained for
Shires at public sales have come from exporters or buyers from abroad,
but from lovers of the heavy breed in England, who have been either
forming or replenishing studs, therefore, ‘the almighty dollar’ has not
been responsible for the figures above quoted. Still it is probable
that with the opening up of the agricultural industry in Western
Canada, South Africa, and elsewhere, Shire stallions will be needed to
help the Colonial settlers to build up a breed of horses which will be
useful for both tillage and haulage purposes.

“The adaptability of the Shire horse to climate and country is well
known, and it is satisfactory for home breeders to hear that Mr.
Martinez de Hoz has recently sold ten Shires, bred in Argentina, at an
average of £223 2_s._ 6_d._, one, a three-year-old, making £525.

“Meanwhile it might be a good investment if a syndicate of British
breeders placed a group of typical Shire horses in a few of the biggest
fairs or shows in countries where weighty horses are wanted, and thus
further the interests of the Shire abroad, and assist in developing the
export trade.”

It may be added that during the summer of 1906, H.M. King Edward and
Lord Rothschild sent a consignment of Shires to the United States of
America for exhibition.




CHAPTER XV

PROMINENT PRESENT-DAY STUDS


Seeing that Lord Rothschild has won the greatest number of challenge
cups and holds the record for having made the highest price, his name
is mentioned first among owners of famous studs.

He joined the Shire Horse Society in February, 1891, and at the show
of 1892 made five entries for the London Show at which he purchased
the second prize three-year-old stallion Carbonite (by Carbon by
Lincolnshire Lad II.) from Mr. Edward Green for 1100 guineas. He is
remembered by the writer as being a wide and weighty horse on short
legs which carried long hair in attendance, and this type has been
found at Tring Park ever since. In 1895 his lordship won first and
third with two chestnut fillies--Vulcan’s Flower by the Champion Vulcan
and Walkern Primrose by Hitchin Duke (by Bar None). The former won the
Filly Cup and was subsequently sold to help to found the famous stud
of Sir Walpole Greenwell at Marden Park, Surrey, the sum given being a
very high one for those days.

The first championship was obtained with the mare Alston Rose in 1901,
which won like honours for Mr. R. W. Hudson in 1902, after costing him
750 guineas at the second sale at Tring Park, January 15, 1902.

Solace, bred by King Edward, was the next champion mare from Lord
Rothschild’s stud. Girton Charmer, winner of the Challenge Cup in
1905, was included in a select shipment of Shires sent to America (as
models of the breed) by our late lamented King and Lord Rothschild in
1906. Princess Beryl, Belle Cole, Chiltern Maid, were mares to win
highest honours for the stud, while a young mare which passed through
Lord Rothschild’s hands, and realized a four-figure sum for him as
a two-year-old from the Devonshire enthusiasts, Messrs. W. and H.
Whitley, is Lorna Doone, the Champion mare of 1914.

Champion’s Goalkeeper, the Tring record-breaker, has been mentioned,
so we can now refer to the successful stud of which he is the central
figure, viz. that owned by Sir Walpole Greenwell at Marden Park,
Woldingham, Surrey, who, as we have seen, bought a good filly from the
Tring Stud in 1895, the year in which he became a member of the Shire
Horse Society. At Lord Rothschild’s first sale in 1898, he purchased
Windley Lily for 430 guineas, and Moorish Maiden, a three-year-old
filly, for 350, since when he has bid only for the best. At the
Tandridge dispersion sale he gave over a thousand pounds for the
Lockinge Forest King mare, Fuchsia of Tandridge, and her foal. Sir
Walpole was one of the first to profit by the Lockinge Forest King
blood, his filly, Marden Peach, by that sire having been a winner at
the Royal of 1908, while her daughter, Marden Constance, has had a
brilliant show career, so has Dunsmore Chessie, purchased from Mr. T.
Ewart as a yearling, twice London Champion mare.

No sale has been held at Marden, but consignments have been sold at
Peterborough, so that the prefix is frequently met with.

The stud owner who is willing to give £4305 for a two-year-old colt
deserves success.


THE PRIMLEY STUD

At the Dunsmore Sale on February 14, 1907, Mr. W. Whitley purchased
Dunsmore Fuchsia (by Jameson), the London Cup winner of 1905 and 1906,
for 520 guineas, also Quality by the same sire, and these two won
second and third for him in London the same month, this being the first
show at which the Primley shires took honours.

The purchase of Tatton Dray King, the Champion stallion of 1908, by
Messrs. W. and H. Whitley in the spring of 1909 for 3700 guineas
created quite a sensation, as it was an outstanding record, it stood so
for nearly four years.

One of the most successful show mares in this--or any--stud is
Mollington Movement by Lockinge Forest King, but the reigning queen is
Lorna Doone, the London and Peterborough Champion of 1914, purchased
privately from the Tring Park Stud. Another built on the same lines
is Sussex Pride with which a Bucks tenant farmer, Mr. R. H. Keene,
won first and reserve champion at the London Show of 1913, afterwards
selling her to Messrs. Whitley, who again won with her in 1914. With
such animals as these Devonshire is likely to hold its own with Shires,
although they do not come from the district known to the law makers of
old as the breeding ground of “the Great Horse.”


THE PENDLEY FEMALES

One of the most successful exhibitors of mares, fillies, and foals, at
the shows of the past few seasons has been Mr. J. G. Williams, Pendley
Manor, Tring. Like other exhibitors already mentioned, the one under
notice owes much of his success to Lockinge Forest King. In 1908 Lord
Egerton’s Tatton May Queen was purchased for 420 guineas, she having
been first in London as a yearling and two-year-old; Bardon Forest
Princess, a reserve London Champion, and Barnfields Forest Queen, Cup
winner there, made a splendid team of winners by the sire named. At the
Tring Park sale of 1913 Mr. Williams gave the highest price made by
a female, 825 guineas, for Halstead Duchess VII., by Redlynch Forest
King. She won the Royal Championship at Bristol for him. One of the
later acquisitions is Snelston Lady, by Slipton King, Cup winner and
reserve Champion in London, 1914, as a three-year-old, first at the
Royal, and reserve Champion at Peterborough. Mr. Williams joined the
Shire Horse Society in 1906, since when he has won all but the London
Championship with his mares and fillies.


A NEW STUD

After Champion’s Goalkeeper was knocked down Mr. Beck announced that
the disappointed bidder was Mr. C. R. H. Gresson, acting for the
Edgcote Shorthorn Company, Wardington, Banbury, his date of admission
to the Shire Horse Society being during that same month, February,
1913. Having failed to get the popular colt, his stable companion and
half brother, Stockman III., was purchased for 540 guineas, and shown
in London just after, where he won fourth prize. From this single entry
in 1913 the foundation of the stud was so rapid that seven entries
were made at the 1914 London Show. Fine Feathers was the first prize
yearling filly, Blackthorn Betty the second prize two-year-old filly,
the own bred Edgcote Monarch being the second prize yearling colt.
After the show Lord Rothschild’s first prize two-year colt, Orfold
Blue Blood, was bought, together with Normandy Jessie, the third prize
yearling colt; so with these two, Fine Feathers, Betty, Chirkenhill
Forest Queen, and Writtle Coming Queen, the Edgcote Shorthorn Co.,
Ltd., took a leading place at the shows of 1914. In future Edgcote
promises to be as famous for its Shires as it has hitherto been for its
Shorthorns.


DUCAL STUDS

A very successful exhibitor of the past season has been his Grace
the Duke of Westminster, who owns a very good young sire in Eaton
Nunsuch--so good that he has been hired by the Peterborough Society.
Shires have been bred on the Eaton Hall estate for many years, and the
stud contains many promising animals now.

Mention must be made of the great interest taken in Shires by the Duke
of Devonshire who, as the Hon. Victor Cavendish, kept a first-class
stud at Holker, Lancs. At the Royal Show of 1909 (Gloucester) Holker
Mars was the Champion Shire stallion, Warton Draughtsman winning the
Norwich Royal Championship, and also that of the London Show of 1912
for his popular owner.


OTHER STUDS

Among those who have done much to promote the breeding of the Old
English type of cart-horse, the name of Mr. Clement Keevil deserves
a foremost place. At Blagdon, Malden, Surrey, he held a number of
stud sales in the eighties and nineties, to which buyers went for
massive-limbed Shires of the good old strains; those with a pedigree
which traced back to Honest Tom (_alias_ Little David), foaled in the
year 1769, to Wiseman’s Honest Tom, foaled in 1800, or to Samson a sire
weighing 1 ton 8 cwt. Later he had a stud at Billington, Beds, where
several sales were held, the last being in 1908, when Mr. Everard gave
860 guineas for the stallion, Lockinge Blagdon. Shortly before that he
sold Blagdon Benefactor for 1000 guineas.

The prefix “Birdsall” has been seen in show catalogues for a number of
years, which mean that the animals holding it were bred, or owned, by
Lord Middleton, at Birdsall, York, he being one of the first noblemen
to found a stud, and he has ably filled the Presidential Chair of the
Shire Horse Society. As long ago as the 1892 London Show there were two
entries from Birdsall by Lord Middleton’s own sire, Northwood, to which
reference is made elsewhere.

Another notable sire purchased by his lordship was Menestrel, first in
London, 1900 (by Hitchin Conqueror), his most famous son being Birdsall
Menestrel, dam Birdsall Darling by Northwood, sold to Lord Rothschild
as a yearling. As a two-year-old this colt was Cup winner and reserve
Champion, and at four he was Challenge Cup winner. A good bidder at
Shire sales, the breeder of a champion, and a consistent supporter of
the Shire breeding industry since 1883, it is regrettable that champion
honours have not fallen to Lord Middleton himself.

Another stud, which was founded near Leeds, by Mr. A. Grandage, has
now been removed to Cheshire. Joining the Shire Horse Society in 1892,
his first entry in London was made in 1893, and four years later, in
1897, Queen of the Shires (by Harold) won the mare Championship for Mr.
Grandage.

In 1909 the winning four-year-old stallion, Gaer Conqueror, of
Lincolnshire Lad descent, was bought from Mr. Edward Green for 825
guineas, which proved to be a real good investment for Mr. Grandage,
seeing that he won the championship of the Shire Horse Show for the two
following years, 1910 and 1911.

Candidates from the Bramhope Stud, Monks Heath, Chelford, Cheshire, are
likely to give a very good account of themselves in the days to come.

Among those who will have the best Shires is Sir Arthur Nicholson,
Highfield, Leek, Staffs. His first London success was third prize with
Rokeby Friar (by Harold) as a two-year-old in 1893, since which date he
has taken a keen personal interest in the breeding of Shire horses, and
has the honour of having purchased Pailton Sorais, the highest-priced
mare yet sold by auction. At the Tring sale of 1913 he gave the second
highest price of that day, viz., 1750 guineas for the three-year-old
stallion, Blacklands Kingmaker, who won first prize for him in London
ten days after, but, alas, was taken ill during his season, for the
Winslow Shire Horse Society, and died. Another bad loss to Sir Arthur
and to Shire breeders generally was the death of Redlynch Forest King,
seeing that he promised to rival his renowned sire, Lockinge Forest
King, for begetting show animals.

Among the many good ones recently exhibited from the stud may be
mentioned Leek Dorothy, twice first in London, and Leek Challenger,
first as a yearling, second as a two-year-old, both of these being by
Redlynch Forest King. With such as these coming on there is a future
before the Shires of Sir Arthur Nicholson.

The name of Muntz is familiar to all Shire breeders owing to the fame
achieved by the late Sir P. Albert Muntz. In 1899 Mr. F. E. Muntz,
of Umberslade, Hockley Heath, Warwickshire, a nephew of the Dunsmore
Baronet, joined the Shire Horse Society, and has since been President.
Quite a good share of prizes have fallen to him, including the Cup for
the best old stallion in London both in 1913 and 1914. The winner,
Danesfield Stonewall, was reserved for the absolute championship on
both occasions, and this typical “Old English Black” had a host of
admirers, while Jones--the Umberslade stud groom--will never forget his
parade before His Majesty King George at the 1913 show.

It used to be said that Shires did not flourish south of London, but
Mr. Leopold Salomons, Norbury Park, Dorking, has helped to prove
otherwise. Beginning with one entry at the 1899 Show, he has entered
quite a string for several years, and the stud contains a number of
high-class stallions, notably Norbury Menestrel, winner of many prizes,
and a particularly well-bred and promising sire, and King of Tandridge
(by Lockinge Forest King), purchased by Mr. Salomons at the Tandridge
dispersion sale for 1600 guineas. At the sale during the London Show of
1914 Mr. Salomons realized the highest price with his own bred Norbury
Coronation, by Norbury Menestrel, who, after winning third prize in his
class, cost the Leigh Shire Horse Society 850 guineas, Norbury George,
by the same sire, winning fifth prize, and making 600 guineas, both
being three years old. This is the kind of advertisement for a stud,
no matter where its situation.

Another Surrey enthusiast is Sir Edward Stern, Fan Court, Chertsey, who
has been a member of the Shire Horse Society since 1903. He purchased
Danesfield Stonewall from Mr. R. W. Hudson, and won several prizes
before re-selling him to Mr. F. E. Muntz. His stud horses now includes
Marathon II., champion at the Oxford County Show of 1910. Mares and
fillies have also been successfully shown at the Royal Counties, and
other meetings in the south of England from the Fan Court establishment.

A fine lot of Shires have been got together, at Tarnacre House,
Garstang, and the first prize yearling at the London Show of 1914,
King’s Choice, was bred by Messrs. J. E. and A. W. Potter, who also won
first with Monnow Drayman, the colt with which Mr. John Ferneyhough
took first prize as a three-year-old. With stallions of his type and
mares as wide, deep, and well-bred as Champion’s Choice (by Childwick
Champion), Shires full of character should be forthcoming from these
Lancashire breeders.

The Carlton Stud continues to flourish, although its founder, the late
Mr. James Forshaw, departed this life in 1908. His business abilities
and keen judgment have been inherited by his sons, one of whom judged
in London last year (1914), as his father did in 1900. This being a
record in Shire Horse history for father and son to judge at the great
Show of the breed.

Carlton has always been famous for its stallions. It has furnished
London winners from the first, including the Champions Stroxton Tom
(1902 and 1903), Present King II. (1906), and Stolen Duchess, the
Challenge Cup winning mare of 1907.

The sires owned by the late Mr. Forshaw and his sons are too numerous
to mention in detail. Bar None is spoken of elsewhere. Another very
impressive stallion was What’s Wanted, the sire of Mr. A. C. Duncombe’s
Premier (also mentioned in another chapter), and a large family of
celebrated sons. His great grandsire was (Dack’s) Matchless 1509, a
great sire in the Fen country, which travelled through Moulton Eaugate
for thirteen consecutive seasons. The late Mr. Forshaw’s opinion
of him is given on another page. One of the most successful Carlton
sires of recent years has been Drayman XXIII., whose son, Tatton Dray
King, won highest honours in London, and realized 3700 guineas when
sold. Seeing that prizes were being won by stallions from this stud
through several decades of last century, and that a large number have
been travelled each season since, while a very large export trade has
been done by Messrs. Forshaw and Sons, it need hardly be said that the
influence of this stud has been world-wide.

It is impossible to mention all the existing studs in a little book
like this, but three others will be now mentioned for the reason that
they are carried on by those who formerly managed successful studs,
therefore they have “kept the ball rolling,” viz. that of Mr. Thomas
Ewart, at Dunsmore, who made purchases on his own behalf when the stud
of the late Sir P. A. Muntz--which he had managed for so long--was
dispersed, and has since brought out many winners, the most famous of
which is Dunsmore Chessie. Mr. R. H. Keene, under whose care the Shires
of Mr. R. W. Hudson (Past-President of the Shire Horse Society) at
Danesfield attained to such prominence, although not actually taking
over the prefix, took a large portion of the land, and carries on Shire
breeding quite successfully on his own account.

The other of this class to be named is Mr. C. E. McKenna, who took over
the Bardon stud from Mr. B. N. Everard when the latter decided to let
the Leicestershire stud farm where Lockinge Forest King spent his last
and worthiest years. Such enterprise gives farmers and men of moderate
means faith in the great and growing industry of Shire Horse breeding.

Of stud owners who have climbed to prominence, although neither
landowners, merchant princes, nor erstwhile stud managers, may be
mentioned Mr. James Gould, Crouchley Lymm, Cheshire, whose Snowdon
Menestrel was first in his class and reserve for the Stallion Cup at
the 1914 London Show; Messrs. E. and J. Whinnerah, Warton, Carnforth,
who won seventh prize with Warton Draughtsman in 1910, afterwards
selling him to the Duke of Devonshire, who reached the top of the tree
with him two years later.

Mr. Henry Mackereth, the new London judge of 1915, entered the
exhibitors’ list at the London Show of 1899. Perhaps his most notable
horse is Lunesdale Kingmaker, with which Lord Rothschild won fourth
prize in 1907, he being the sire of Messrs. Potter’s King’s Choice
above mentioned.

Many other studs well meriting notice could be dealt with did time and
space permit, including that of a tenant farmer who named one of his
best colts “Sign of Riches,” which must be regarded as an advertisement
for the breed from a farmer’s point of view.

Of past studs only one will be mentioned, that of the late Sir Walter
Gilbey, the dispersal having taken place on January 13, 1915. The first
Shire sale at Elsenham was held in 1885--thirty years ago--when the
late Lord Wantage gave the highest price, 475 guineas, for Glow, by
Spark, the average of £172 4_s._ 6_d._ being unbeaten till the Scawby
sale of 1891 (which was £198 17_s._ 3_d._).

Sir Walter has been mentioned as one of the founders of the Shire Horse
Society; his services in aid of horse breeding were recognized by
presenting him with his portrait in oils, the subscribers numbering
1250. The presentation was made by King Edward (then Prince of Wales)
at the London Show of 1891.




CHAPTER XVI

THE FUTURE OUTLOOK


This book is written when war, and all that pertains to it, is the
absorbing topic. In fact, no other will be listened to. What is
the good of talking about such a peaceful occupation as that of
agriculture while the nation is fighting for its very existence? To a
certain extent this can be understood, but stock breeding, and more
particularly horse breeding, cannot be suspended for two or three
seasons and then resumed without causing a gap in the supply of horses
coming along for future use.

The cry of the army authorities is for “more and more men,” together
with a demand for a constant supply of horses of many types, including
the weight-moving War Horse, and if the supply is used up, with no
provision being made for a quantity of four-footed recruits to haul the
guns or baggage waggons in the days to come, the British Army, and
most others, will be faced with a problem not easily solved.

The motor-mad mechanic may think that his chance has come, but generals
who have to lead an army over water-logged plains, or snow-covered
mountains, will demand horses, hitherto--and henceforth--indispensable
for mounting soldiers on, rushing their guns quickly into position, or
drawing their food supplies and munitions of war after them.

When the mechanic has provided horseless vehicles to do all this,
horse breeding can be ignored by fighting men--not before. But horses,
particularly draft horses, are needed for commercial use. So far, coal
merchants are horse users, while brewers, millers, and other lorry
users have not altogether discarded the horse-drawn vehicle.

For taking loads to and from the landing stage at Liverpool heavy
horses will be in great demand after the war--perhaps greater than they
have ever been. The railways will continue to exist, and, while they
do, powerful Shire geldings must be employed; no other can put the
necessary weight into the collar for shunting loaded trucks.

During the autumn of 1914 no other kind of advice--although they got
plenty of it--was so freely and so frequently given to farmers as this,
“grow more wheat.”

If this has been acted upon, and there is no doubt that it has, at
least to some extent, it follows, as sure as the night follows the day,
that more horses will be required by those who grow the wheat. The land
has to be ploughed and cultivated, the crop drilled, cut, carted home
and delivered to mill, or railway truck, all meaning horse labour.

It may happen that large farmers will use motor ploughs or steam
waggons, but these are beyond the reach of the average English farmer.
Moreover, when bought they depreciate in value, whether working or
standing idle, which is exactly what the Shire gelding or brood mare
does not do. If properly cared for and used they appreciate in value
from the time they are put to work until they are six or seven years
old, and by that age most farmers have sold their non-breeders to make
room for younger animals. Horse power is therefore the cheapest and
most satisfactory power for most farmers to use in front of field
implements and farm waggons, a fact which is bound to tell in favour of
the Shire in the coming times of peace which we anticipate.

When awarding prizes for the best managed farm, the judges appointed by
the Royal Agricultural Society of England are instructed to consider--

“General Management with a view to profit,” so that any breed of live
stock which leaves a profit would help a competitor.

Only a short time ago a Warwickshire tenant farmer told his landlord
that Shire horses had enabled himself and many others to attend the
rent audit, “with a smile on his face and the rent in his pocket.”

Most landlords are prepared to welcome a tenant in that state,
therefore they should continue to encourage the industry as they have
done during the past twenty-five years.

Wars come to an end--the “Thirty Years’ War” did--so let us remember
the Divine promise to Noah after the flood, “While the earth remaineth
seedtime and harvest … shall not cease,” Gen. 8:22. As long as there is
sowing and reaping to be done horses--Shire horses--will be wanted.

    “Far back in the ages
      The plough with wreaths was crowned;
    The hands of kings and sages
      Entwined the chaplet round;
    Till men of spoil disdained the toil
      By which the world was nourished,
    And dews of blood enriched the soil
      Where green their laurels flourished:
    Now the world her fault repairs--
      The guilt that stains her story;
    And weeps; her crimes amid the cares
      That formed her earliest glory.
    The glory, earned in deadly fray,
      Shall fade, decay and perish.
    Honour waits, o’er all the Earth
      Through endless generations,
    The art that calls her harvests forth
      And feeds the expectant nations.”




INDEX


    A

    Alston Rose, champion mare 1901 … 104

    Armour-clad warriors, 1, 7

    Army horses, 6

    Ashbourne Foal Show, 80

    Attention to feet, 42

    Aurea, champion mare, 18, 65

    Author’s Preface, v

    Average prices, 76


    B

    Back breeding, value of, 11, 13, 39

    Bakewell, Robert, 2, 22, 54

    Bardon Extraordinary, champion gelding, 65, 78

    Bardon Stud, 118

    Bar None, 80

    Bearwardcote Blaze, 60

    Bedding, 35

    Birdsall Menestrel, 84, 111

    ---- stud, 110

    Black horses, Bakewell’s, 55

    Black horses from Flanders, 58

    Blagdon Stud, 110

    Blending Shire and Clydesdale breeds, 59

    Boiled barley, 36

    Bradley, Mr. John, 83

    Bramhope stud, 111

    Breeders, farmer, 27

    Breeders, prizes for, 65

    Breeding from fillies, 17

    Breeding, time for, 31

    Bury Victor Chief, champion in 1892 … 68, 69

    Buscot Harold, champion stallion, 17, 65


    C

    Calwich Stud, 61, 80

    Canada, 101

    Carbonite, 103

    Care of the feet, 42

    Carlton Stud, 116

    Cart-colts, 23

    Cart-horses, 54

    Castrating colts, 39

    Certificate of Soundness, 62

    Champion’s Goalkeeper, champion in 1913 and 1914 … 67, 104

    Champions bred at Sandringham, 3

    Cheap sires, 12

    Clark, Mr. A. H., 79

    Clydesdales, 58

    Coats of mail, 51

    Coke’s, Hon. E., dispersion sale, 3

    Colonies, 94

    Colour, 38

    Composition of food, 33

    Condition and bloom, 36

    Cost of feeding, 33

    Cost of shipping Shires, 98

    Crisp, Mr. F., 63, 70

    Cross, Mr. J. P., 81

    Crushed oats and bran, 31


    D

    Dack’s Matchless, 82, 116

    Danesfield Stonewall, 114

    Details of shows, 60

    Development grant, 14

    Devonshire, Duke of, 109

    Doubtful breeders, 37

    Draught horses, 23

    Drayman XXIII, 117

    Drew, Lawrence, of Merryton, 59

    Duncombe, Mr. A. C., 69, 80

    Dunsmore Chessie, 81, 105

    ---- Gloaming, 3, 72

    ---- Jameson, 80

    ---- Stud, 80


    E

    Eadie, Mr. James, 65, 78

    Early breeding, 17

    Eaton Hall Stud, 109

    Eaton Nunsuch, 109

    Edgcote Shorthorn Company’s Stud, 108

    Effect of war on cost of feeding, 40

    Egerton of Tatton, Lord, 2, 77

    Ellesmere, Earl of, 2, 7, 70

    Elsenham Cup, 18, 79

    Elsenham Hall Stud, 119

    English cart-horse, 2

    Entries at London shows, 61

    Everard, Mr. B. N., 118

    Ewart, Mr. T., 117

    Exercise, 23, 27

    Export trade, 92, 95


    F

    Facts and figures, 61

    Fattening horses, 26

    Feet, care of, 42

    Fillies, breeding from, 17

    Flemish horses, 1, 53, 57

    Flora, by Lincolnshire Lad, 60

    Foals, time for, 31

    Foals, treatment of, 32

    Foods and feeding, 30

    Formation of Shire Horse Society, 13

    Forshaw, Mr. James, 80, 116

    Foundation stock, 9

    Founding a stud, 8

    Freeman-Mitford, Mr., now Lord Redesdale, 62

    Future outlook, 21


    G

    Gaer Conqueror, 112

    Galbraith, Mr. A., 92

    Geldings at the London Show, 64

    ----, demand for, 15, 24

    ----, production of, 15

    Gilbey, Sir Walter, 2, 14, 51, 54, 119

    Girton Charmer, champion in 1905 … 104

    Glow, famous mare, 16, 119

    Good workers, 23

    Gould, Mr. James, 118

    Grading up, 8

    Grandage, Mr. A., 111

    Green, Mr. E., 112

    Greenwell, Sir Walpole, 105

    Griffin, Mr. F. W., 79


    H

    Halstead Duchess VII., 107

    Halstead Royal Duke, champion in 1909 … 68, 83

    Haltering, 28

    Hamilton, Duke of, importations, 58

    Harold, 60

    Hastings, Battle of, 53

    Hay, 33

    Heath, Mr. R., 85

    Henderson’s, Sir Alexander, successes in 1898 … 64

    Hendre Champion, 99

    Hendre Crown Prince, 70, 99

    Hereditary diseases, 76

    High prices, 69

    Highfield Stud, Leek, 112

    History of the Shire, 51

    Hitchin Conqueror, London champion, 1891, 62

    Honest Tom, 74

    Horse, population and the war, 18, 120

    Horse-power cheapest, 123

    Horses for the army, 6

    Horses at Bannockburn, 52

    How to show a Shire, 48

    Hubbard, Mr. Matthew, 79

    Huntingdon, Earl of, importations, 58


    I

    Importations from Flanders and Holland, 53, 57

    Inherited complaints, 10


    J

    Judges at London Shire Shows, 1890-1915 … 87


    K

    Keene, Mr. R. H., 117

    Keevil, Mr. Clement, 110

    King Edward VII., 3, 73, 86, 102

    King George, 114


    L

    Lady Victoria, Lord Wantage’s prize filly, 17

    Land suitable, 45

    Landlords and Shire breeding, 3, 15

    Leading, 28

    Lessons in showing, 50

    Letting out sires, 14

    Lincolnshire Lad 1196 … 59

    Linseed meal, 36

    Liverpool heavy horses 122

    Llangattock, Lord, 5, 77

    Local horse breeding societies, 15

    Lockinge Cup, 78

    Lockinge Forest King, 81

    Lockington Beauty, 83

    London Show, 61

    Longford Hall sale, 3

    Lorna Doone, 70, 104


    M

    McKenna, Mr. C. E., 118

    Mackereth, Mr. H., 119

    Management, 21, 23

    Manger feeding, 33

    Maple, Sir J. Blundell, 72

    Marden Park Stud, 105

    Mares, management of, 17

    ----, selection of, 8

    Markeaton Royal Harold, 17, 60, 65

    Marmion, 70

    Mating, 20, 22

    Members of Shire Horse Society, 63

    Menestrel, 111

    Michaelis, Mr. Max, 74

    Middleton, Lord, 84, 110

    Minnehaha, champion mare, 64

    Mollington Movement, 106

    Muntz, Mr. F. E., 113

    Muntz, Sir P. Albert, 5, 72, 80


    N

    Nellie Blacklegs, 84

    Nicholson, Sir Arthur, 74, 112

    Norbury Menestrel, 114

    Norbury Park Stud, 114

    Numbers exported, 96


    O

    Oats, 33

    Old English cart-horse, 2, 13, 51

    ---- ---- war horse, 1, 50, 57

    Origin and progress, 51

    Outlook for the breed, 120

    Over fattening, 26


    P

    Pailton Sorais, champion mare, 74, 112

    Pedigrees, 8

    Pendley Stud, 107

    Ploughing, 2, 22, 57

    Popular breed, a, 1

    Potter, Messrs. J. E. and H. W., 115

    Premier, 69, 84

    Preparing fillies for mating, 18

    Primley Stud, 106

    Prince Harold, 77

    Prince William, 69, 78

    Prizes at Shire shows, 63

    Prominent breeders, 103

    ---- Studs, 102

    Prospects of the breed, 121


    R

    Rearing and feeding, 30

    Records, a few, 77

    Redlynch Forest King, 113

    Registered sires, 13

    Rent-paying horses, vi, 11, 124

    Repository sales, 5

    Rickford Coming King, 85

    Rock salt, 35

    Rogers, Mr. A. C., 67

    Rokeby Harold, champion in 1893 and 1895 … 60, 66, 68

    Roman invasion, 51

    Rothschild, Lord, 68, 102, 103

    Rowell, Mr. John, 69, 95

    Russia, 93


    S

    Sales noted, 4, 76

    Salomons, Mr. Leopold, 99

    Sandringham Stud, 3, 73, 86

    Scawby sale, 63

    Select shipment to U.S.A., 102

    Selecting the dams, 9

    Selection of mares, 8

    ---- of sires, 12

    Separating colts and fillies, 39

    Sheds, 35

    Shire Horse Society, 2, 13, 91, 93

    Shire or war horse, 1, 51

    ---- sales, 69, 76

    Shires for war, 6, 121

    ---- as draught horses, 1

    ----, feeding, 30

    ---- feet, care of, 42

    ---- for farm work, 1, 22

    ---- for guns, 6

    ----, formation of society, 13, 93

    ----, judges, 81

    Shires, London Show, 61

    ----, management, 12

    ----, origin and progress of, 51

    ---- pedigrees kept, 8

    ----, prices, 69, 76

    ----, prominent studs, 103

    ----, sales of, 76

    ----, showing, 48

    ----, weight of, 6

    ----, working, 25

    Show condition, 26

    Show, London, 60

    Showing a Shire, 48

    Sires, selection of, 12

    Smith-Carington, Mr. H. H., 73

    Solace, champion mare, 3

    Soils suitable for horse breeding, 45

    Soundness, importance of, 9

    Spark, 69

    Stallions, 12

    Starlight, champion mare 1891 … 62, 78

    Stern, Sir E., 115

    Street, Mr. Frederick, 2

    Stroxton Tom, 116

    Stud Book, 2, 13, 91

    Stud, founding a, 8

    Studs, present day, 103

    ---- sales, 4, 76

    Stuffing show animals, 26, 37

    Suitable foods and system of feeding, 30

    Sutton-Nelthorpe, Mr. R. N., 63, 83

    System of feeding, 30


    T

    Tatton Dray King, 71

    ---- Herald, 71

    Team work, 23

    “The Great Horse,” Sir Walter Gilbey’s book, 14, 51, 54

    Training for show, 48

    ---- for work, 27

    Treatment of foals, 32

    Tring Park Stud, 4, 103

    Two-year-old champion stallions, 67

    Two-year-old fillies, 17


    U

    United States, Shires in the, 3, 92

    Unsoundness, 10


    V

    Value of pedigrees, 8

    ---- of soundness, 10

    Veterinary inspection, 62

    Vulcan, champion in 1891 … 70, 79


    W

    Wantage, Lord, 2, 78

    War demand, 121

    War horse, vi, 51, 91

    War and breeding, 18

    Warton Draughtsman, 118

    Wealthy stud-owners, 14

    Weaning time, 33

    Weight of Armoured Knight, 51

    Weight of Shires, 6

    Welshpool Shire Horse Society, 70

    Westminster, Duke of, 109

    What’s Wanted, 116

    Whinnerah, Messrs. E. and J., 118

    Whitley, Messrs. W. and H., 106

    Williams, Mr. J. G., 107

    Wintering, 40

    ---- foals, 35

    Winterstoke, Lord, 86

    Work of Shire Horse Society, 13, 60

    Working stallions, 25

    World’s war, v, 120

    Worsley Stud, 7


    Y

    Yards, 35

                                THE END

VINTON & COMPANY, LTD., 8, BREAM’S BUILDINGS, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON, E.C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Shire Horse in Peace and War, by 
J. Albert Frost

*** 